Kenneth E. Hagin
Unless otherwise indicated, all Scripture quotations in
this volume are from the King James Version of the
Bible.

 Cover photograph of throne chair used by permission:
              Philbrook Museum of Art
                  Tulsa, Oklahoma



                 Fourth Printing 1994

                 ISBN 0-89276-520-8


     In the U.S. Write:           In Canada write:
  Kenneth Hagin Ministries    Kenneth Hagin Ministries
      P.O. Box 50126                P.O. Box 335
   Tulsa, OK 74150-0126      Etobicoke (Toronto), Ontario
                                  Canada, M9A 4X3




       Copyright © 1993 RHEMA Bible Church
          AKA Kenneth Hagin Ministries, Inc.


              All Rights Reserved Printed




The Faith Shield is a trademark of RHEMA Bible
Church, AKA Kenneth Hagin Ministries, Inc., registered
with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and
therefore may not be duplicated.
                              Contents
1 Origins: Satan and His Kingdom.................................5

2 Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body...........35

3 The Devil or the Flesh?...............................................69

4 Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression,
Obsession, and Possession...........................................107

5 Can a Christian Have a Demon?..............................143

6 How to Deal With Evil Spirits..................................173

7 The Wisdom of God...................................................211

8 Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?. .253

9 Pulling Down Strongholds........................................297

10 Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of
Darkness.......................................................................329

11 Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?.................369

12 Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance...............399
                Chapter 1
      1   Origins: Satan and His
                Kingdom
    Believers are seated with Christ in heavenly places,
far above all powers and principalities of darkness. No
demon can deter the believer who is seated with Christ
far above all the works of the enemy! Our seating and
reigning with Christ in heavenly places is a position of
authority, honor, and triumph—not failure, depression,
and defeat.
    Since the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ has the
triumph and victory over the devil and his cohorts in
every encounter, why. does it seem so many believers
are subject to Satan and his deceptions?
   Whether or not believers are victorious over the
devil depends on what view they have of themselves as
the Church—militant, defeated, or triumphant. It all
depends on how well they understand their position in
Christ.
    The militant Church depicts a body of believers who
are not yet seated in heavenly places in Christ and are
still "battling" to try to gain the victory over an enemy
that hasn't been defeated yet by the Lord Jesus Christ.
    The defeated Church also gives us a picture of a
Church which is ignorant of the fact that they are
seated with Christ and that they are supposed to be
reigning in life through Jesus Christ. Because they are
ignorant of their position in Christ or they've never
used the authority they really possess, these believers

                           5
                 The Triumphant Church


are constantly ravaged by the wiles of Satan and are in
a state of continual failure and defeat.
    But the triumphant Church is the biblical
perspective of the Body of Christ seated with Christ in
heavenly places far above all powers and principalities
(Eph. 1:3; 2:6). The triumphant Church scripturally
portrays a Body of believers who not only know but
exercise their authority in Christ and therefore reign
victoriously in life through Jesus Christ over Satan, a
defeated foe (Rom. 5:17).
    In this age when demon activity is increasing
around the world, it is vital that believers know what
their redemption in Christ entitles them to. We need to
be fully convinced of the authority that is ours because
of the victory Jesus has already won for us over all the
power of the enemy. The only way we can have
confidence in our authority over the enemy is to know
and walk in the light of the written Word of God.
   With that introduction, let's go to the Book of
beginnings, Genesis, and start our study by
investigating the origins of Satan and lis kingdom.

       Hints of a Possible Pre-Adamic
                  Kingdom
    The origin and fall of Satan, or Lucifer, as he was
called is made fairly clear in Scripture. He was called
Lucifer before his expulsion and fall from Heaven, but
Satan after his expulsion and fall. The origin of demons,
devils, or evil spirits is not made so clear.
    Some Bible scholars believe millions of years
elapsed between Genesis 1:1 and Genesis 1:2. And some
believe there could have been an original earthly
kingdom before the creation recorded in Genesis chapter


                           6
              Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


1.
     GENESIS 1:1,2
1 In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth.
     2 And the earth was without form, and void; and
     darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the
     Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

   The evil spirits that are here on earth now could
have been part if that original pre-Adamic kingdom.
Many Bible scholars agree that even before the flood, a
pre-Adamic kingdom existed, because we know from
archeological discoveries that dinosaurs and mammoth
animals once lived on the earth.
   Where did they come from? Maybe those creatures
came from a different kind of creation that existed on
the earth before Adam—some kind of a pre-Adamic
creation. In Isaiah chapter 14, we have hint in
Scriptures of a pre-Adamic kingdom.
     ISAIAH 14:12-14
12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of
the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground,
which didst weaken the nations!
13 For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ASCEND
INTO HEAVEN, I will exalt MY THRONE ABOVE
THE STARS of God: I will sit also upon the mount of
the congregation, in the sides of the north:
     14 I will ASCEND ABOVE the HEIGHTS of the
     CLOUDS; I will be like the most High.

    Evidently Lucifer had some kind of a throne
indicating some kind of authority. Lucifer probably
reigned below the clouds and stars because verse 13
says, "... I will exalt my throne ABOVE the stars.”
implying that Lucifer's throne was below the stars. If


                            7
                 The Triumphant Church


Lucifer's throne was below the stars, it could have
encompassed and included the realm and domain of the
earth.
    It's possible that Lucifer ruled a kingdom here on
earth which existed before Adam but at the same time
pre-historic animals roamed this earth. Maybe Satan
ruled his kingdom during this pre-Adamic creation, and
the evil spirits we now have on the earth were fallen
spirit beings from that creation. We don't have chapter
and verse for it; but on the other hand, Scripture
doesn't refute it either. We do see hints of it in the
Scripture.
   Also, we do know that there are evil spirits here on
the earth today. So where did they come from? The
other possibility is that evil spirits include those angels
that fell in Lucifer's rebellion (Rev. 12:4,9).
    Man was not part of that pre-adamic creation, for
the Bible indicates that Adam was the first man: "And,
so it is written, The FIRST MAN Adam was made a
living soul..." (1 Cor. 15:45). But some kind of creation
could have existed before Adam—even an entirely
different kind of creation than we know today.
    I'm not presenting this theory dogmatically because
we don't have enough light on it in the Scriptures to be
dogmatic. We can't be dogmatic on matters we can't
support scripturally. Sometimes we wish we had more
light on the origin of evil spirits, but evidently God told
us in His Word what He wanted us to know.

     Lucifer's Original Position and Fall
   We can say with certainty that the devil and demons
are fallen beings because the Bible says they are. They
have fallen from whatever estate they once occupied


                            8
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


(Rev. 12:4,9). And the Bible does shed light on the
origin of Satan, or Lucifer, as he was originally called.
   Where did Satan come from originally? Isaiah 14
and Ezekiel 28 give us a picture of Lucifer's existence in
the beginning as God originally created him and his
rebellion and fall. We know that God didn't make Satan
as he is today because God made everything in the
beginning and it was all good (Gen. 1:10,12,18,21,25;
James 1:17).
   In Ezekiel chapter 28, the Bible describes Lucifer
before his expulsion and fall from Heaven.
   EZEKIEL 28:12-16
12 ... Thus saith the Lord God; Thou sealest up the
sum, FULL OF WISDOM, and PERFECT IN BEAUTY.
13 Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; EVERY
PRECIOUS STONE WAS THY COVERING ... the
workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was
prepared in thee in the day that THOU WAST
CREATED.
14 Thou art THE ANOINTED CHERUB that covereth;
and I have set thee so: THOU WAST UPON THE
HOLY MOUNTAIN OF GOD; thou hast walked up and
down in the midst of the stones of fire.
15 Thou was PERFECT IN THY WAYS from the day
that thou wast created, TILL INIQUITY WAS FOUND
IN THEE.
   16 By the multitude of thy merchandise they
   have filled the midst of thee with violence, and
   THOU HAST SINNED: therefore I will cast thee
   AS PROFANE out of the mountain of God: and I
   will destroy thee, O COVERING CHERUB, from
   the midst of the stones of fire.

   In this passage the Bible refers to Lucifer as a
created being, “an anointed cherub," not as a human


                            9
                 The Triumphant Church


being: "Thou was perfect in all thy ways from the day
that THOU WAST CREATED, till iniquity was found
in thee" (v. 15).
   God didn't create Lucifer as we know him now. After
Lucifer's expulsion and fall from Heaven, he became the
devil, but he was not created that way. God created
Lucifer perfect in his ways (Ezek. 28:15), full of wisdom
and perfect in beauty (v. 12). The Bible also says that
Lucifer was "... upon the holy mountain of God ..."
(Ezek. 28:14), so we know he had some access to God.
   Here is another interesting thought about Lucifer as
he was originally created. Ezekiel 28:13 tells us: “... the
workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was
prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created."
   Evidently Lucifer had something to do with music.
Perhaps he was Heaven's chief musician before his
expulsion and fall from Heaven. Did you ever notice
how music plays a part in the plan and program of God,
as well as in Satan's plan?
    The right kind of music prepares you to yield to the
Spirit of God, and the wrong kind prepares you to yield
to the spirit of the devil. The devil works through the
flesh or unregenerated soul, but God works through
your spirit by the Holy Spirit.
   The Bible says iniquity was found in Lucifer (Ezek.
28:15). What was his sin?
   EZEKIEL 28:17,18
17 THINE HEART WAS LIFTED UP BECAUSE OF
THY BEAUTY, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom BY
REASON OF THY BRIGHTNESS....
   18 Thou hast DEFILED thy sanctuaries by
   the multitude of THINE INIQUITIES....



                            10
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


    Lucifer was lifted up in pride because of his great
beauty. Because of his pride, he wanted to become like
God and ascend into Heaven so he could usurp God's
authority. The Bible talks about Lucifer's iniquity in
Isaiah 14, where God tells us Lucifer's evil intentions
based on his five declarations or "I wills."
   ISAIAH 14:13,14
13 For thou hast said in thine heart, I WILL ascend into
heaven, I WILL exalt my throne above the stars of God:
I WILL sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in
the sides of the north:
   14 I WILL ascend above the heights of the
   clouds; I WILL be like the most High.
    Evidently Lucifer was a free moral agent and had
free exercise of his own will, for Lucifer said, "I will."
He could choose. And he made the wrong choice; he
tried to exalt his throne above God's throne. Because of
that, God said to Lucifer, “... thou hast sinned …" (Ezek.
28:16).
    Then in Ezekiel 28, notice how God responded to
Lucifer's five "I wills" with five "I wills" or declarations
of His own. When God declared, "I will" He decreed
righteous judgment for Lucifer's rebellion, which
resulted in Lucifer's expulsion and fall from Heaven.
   EZEKIEL 28:16-18
16 By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled
the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned:
therefore I WILL cast thee as profane out of the
mountain of God: and I WILL destroy thee, O covering
cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.
   17 Thine heart was lifted up because of thy
   beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by
   reason of thy brightness: I WILL cast thee


                            11
                 The Triumphant Church

   to the ground, I WILL lay thee before kings,
   that they may behold thee.
18 Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude
of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick;
therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee,
it shall devour thee, and I WILL bring thee to ashes
upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee.
    We see Lucifer's expulsion and fall from Heaven in
these passages in Isaiah 14 and Ezekiel 28, and Jesus
also described it in Luke 10.
   ISAIAH 14:12
   12 How art thou FALLEN FROM HEAVEN,
   O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou
   CUT DOWN TO THE GROUND, which didst
   weaken the nations!

    EZEKIEL 28:16,17
16 ... I will CAST THEE AS PROFANE OUT OF THE
MOUNTAIN OF GOD....
    17 ... I will CAST THEE TO THE GROUND....

   LUKE 10:18
   18 And he [Jesus] said unto them, I beheld
   Satan as lightning FALL FROM HEAVEN.

      Satan's Names Reveal His Nature
               and Character
    In the garden of Eden we get a glimpse of Lucifer, or
Satan, as he was called after his expulsion and fall from
Heaven. This passage also reveals Satan's nature and
character after his fall. The Bible says, "Now the
SERPENT was more SUBTIL than any beast of the
field which the Lord God had made" (Gen. 3:1). Once
tempted, Eve told God, "The serpent BEGUILED me,

                            12
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


and I did eat" (Gen. 3:13), showing Satan's crafty and
deceptive nature.
   Once an anointed cherub in the mountain of God,
Satan was cursed by God and took the form of a
serpent: "And the Lord God said unto THE SERPENT,
Because thou hast done this, THOU ART CURSED
above all cattle, and above every beast of the field;
UPON THY BELLY SHALT THOU GO, and dust shalt
thou eat all the days of thy life" (Gen. 3:14).
   What do the Scriptures say regarding Satan's
nature and character? The biblical names given to
Satan reveal his nature, character, and also show his
realm of authority on this earth.
   Adversary:      “...    your   ADVERSARY       the
devil...walketh about, seeking whom he may devour" (1
Peter 5:8).
    Thief: "The THIEF cometh...to steal, and to kill, and
to destroy ..." (John 10:10).
   Murderer and liar: "Ye [the scribes and the
Pharisees] are of your father the devil, and the lusts of
your father ye will do. He was a MURDERER from the
beginning ...he is a LIAR, and the father of it" (John
8:44).
    Accuser of the brethren: “... THE ACCUSER OF
OUR BRETHREN is cast down, which accused them
before our God day and night" (Rev. 12:10).
   Deceiver "And the great dragon was cast out, that
old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which
DECEIVETH the whole world ..." (Rev. 12:9).
    Angel of light: "... for Satan himself is transformed
into an ANGEL OF LIGHT" (2 Cor. 11:4). As a deceiver,
Satan transforms himself into an angel of light.


                           13
                 The Triumphant Church


    The prince of this world: "Now is the judgment of
this world: now shall THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD
be cast out" (John 12:31; 14:30; 16:8,11).
    Prince of the power of the air: “... in time past ye
walked according to the course of this world, according
to THE PRINCE OF THE POWER OF THE AIR, THE
SPIRIT that now worketh in the children of
DISOBEDIENCE" (Eph. 2:2).
   The god of this world system: "In whom THE GOD
OF THIS WORLD hath blinded the minds of them
which believe not..." (2 Cor. 4:4).
   If people understood that Satan is the god of this
world, it would clear up a lot of confusion they have
about why evil exists on this earth.
    Some people are so taken up with the evil in the
world that they think the universe is basically evil
instead of good. Some people have accused God of being
the author and creator of evil. For example, I read an
article some time ago written by a well-known
newspaper columnist here in America. He said he was
not religiously inclined, didn't belong to any church, and
never had. He didn't believe the Bible was the Word of
God, and he didn't know if God existed or not.
    In his article he said, "Christians say there is a God
who created everything and that God is running this
universe. Logically speaking, it would seem a Supreme
Being did create the universe. But if God is the Ruler of
this universe and He's running everything, He surely
has things in a mess. Why doesn't He put a stop to war
and poverty and innocent babies dying?"
    He was trying to understand why a good God who is
ruling the world would allow evil to exist. But this
newspaper columnist had only heard one side of the


                           14
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


argument—he didn't know that the Bible says Satan is
the god of this world (2 Cor. 4:4).
   If this journalist had known and believed the Bible,
he would have known that God made the world in the
beginning and saw that everything was good (Gen.
1:10,12,18,21,25,31; James 1:17). God made man and
gave man dominion over the work of His hands.
   GENESIS 1:26,28
   26 And God said, Let us make man in our image,
   after our likeness: and let them have
   DOMINION over the fish of the sea, and over the
   fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over ALL
   THE EARTH, and over every creeping thing that
   creepeth upon the earth....
   28 And God blessed them, and God said
   unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
   replenish the earth, and subdue it: and
   HAVE DOMINION over the fish of the sea,
   and over the fowl of the air, and over every
   living thing that moveth upon the earth.

   PSALM 8:4-6
4 What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the
son of man, that thou visitest him?
5 For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels,
and hast crowned him with glory and honour.
   6 THOU MADEST HIM TO HAVE
   DOMINION OVER THE WORKS OF THY
   HANDS: thou hast put all things under his
   feet.

   PSALM 115:16
   16 The heaven, even the heavens, are the
   Lord's: but the earth HATH HE GIVEN TO
   THE CHILDREN OF MEN.


                          15
                 The Triumphant Church


    Satan Took Possession of Man's Lost
                Dominion
    In the beginning, Adam had the dominion over this
world, and in that sense, Adam was made the "god" of
this world. But when Adam and Eve ate of the
forbidden fruit, their eyes were opened and they new
good and evil (Gen. 3:6,7). God had told Adam and Eve
that in he day they ate of the fruit, they would die.
Adam and Eve didn't die physically; they died
spiritually. When they died spiritually, hey were cut off
or separated from God. By that act of disobedience,
Adam forfeited his dominion on this earth to the devil.
    The Bible substantiates the fact that Adam sold out
his dominion to Satan through disobedience, and
allowed Satan to become the god of this world. Look at
the account of Satan tempting Jesus.
    LUKE 4:1,2,5-8
1 And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from
Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
2 Being forty days TEMPTED OF THE DEVIL....
5 And the devil, taking him up into an high mountain,
shewed unto him ALL THE KINGDOMS OF THE
WORLD in a moment of time.
6 And the devil said unto him, ALL THIS POWER
[authority] will I give thee, and the glory of them: FOR
THAT IS DELIVERED UNTO ME; and to whomsoever
I will I give it.
7 If thou therefore wilt worship me, ALL shall be thine.
    8 And Jesus answered and said unto him,
    Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written,
    Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and
    him only shalt thou serve.
   There are several important truths to notice here.

                           16
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


Ministers have said to me, "Satan was just lying to
Jesus by saying he would give Jesus the authority over
the kingdoms of the world, because Satan didn't have
authority over them." But Satan did have that authority
because the kingdoms of the world had been delivered
over to Satan by Adam when he sinned against God.
   The Amplified Bible shows this even more clearly.
   LUKE 4:5,6 (Amplified)
5 Then the devil took Him up to a high mountain, and
showed Him ALL THE KINGDOMS OF THE
HABITABLE WORLD IN A MOMENT OF TIME—in
the twinkling of an eye;
   6 And he said to Him, To You I will give all
   THIS POWER and AUTHORITY and their
   glory ... FOR IT HAS BEEN TURNED OVER
   TO ME, and I give it to whom I will.
    Who turned the kingdoms of the world over to
Satan? Was it God? No, God gave them to Adam
originally, but when Adam sinned and disobeyed God,
he forfeited his right to them, so Satan took dominion of
them.
   We know Satan didn't have authority over the world
before Adam gave it to him, because Satan fell from the
dominion he did have (Ezek. 28:16-18; Luke 10:18).
   So Adam had the dominion and authority over the
earth originally, but he delivered it into Satan's hands
when he disobeyed God's commandment (Rom. 5:14
Amp.). That's when Satan became the god of this world.
   Also, if Satan didn't have the authority over the
kingdoms of this world, then the Bible is lying when it
says that Jesus was tempted by the devil (Luke 4:2). If
Satan had no authority and no real dominion over the
kingdoms of the earth, this wouldn't have been a real


                            17
                 The Triumphant Church


temptation to Jesus. But the Bible calls it a temptation:
"And Jesus ... was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
Being forty days, TEMPTED OF THE DEVIL ..." (Luke
4:1,2). Therefore, Satan did have authority and
dominion on the earth because he could tempt Jesus
with it.
   So Satan took Adam's place of dominion and
authority on the earth. But is that the end of it?
Emphatically, no! God sent Jesus to the earth to redeem
mankind and to restore to man his lost dominion and
authority on this earth. And as man exercises the
authority he has been given in Christ, he fulfills God's
plan and will upon the earth.
   However, until Adam's lease runs out—that is, until
time as we know it comes to an end and Satan receives
God's final judgment—Satan has authority to be here.
    Remember in the New Testament when Jesus would
enter into the synagogue, many times people who were
possessed with demons would cry out, “... What have we
to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come
hither to torment us BEFORE THE TIME?" (Matt.
8:29).
   Satan knows his time on this earth is running out,
and he knows his impending torment and doom are
prophesied in the Book of Revelation (Rev. 20:10).

    Satan's Dominion After His Fall Also
        Encompasses the Heavenlies
    Ephesians 6:12 tells us that Satan's kingdom
encompassed not only the realm of this world, but it
also included the regions known in the Bible as the
"high places" or "the heavenlies:"
   EPHESIANS 6:12

                           18
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom

   12 For we wrestle not against flesh and
   blood,   but against   PRINCIPALITIES,
   against POWERS, against the RULERS OF
   THE DARKNESS of this world, against
   SPIRITUAL WICKEDNESS [or wicked spirits]
   in HIGH PLACES [heavenlies].
    Instead of "spiritual wickedness" a marginal note in
my King Tames Version reads "wicked spirits in the
heavenlies." So we could read this verse: "For we wrestle
not against flesh and blood, but against ... wicked
spirits IN THE HEAVENLIES." Therefore, we :now
that Satan rules in the heavenlies.

                  Three Heavens
    What does the Bible mean by "heavenlies"? Actually,
the Bible refers to three heavens. We see a direct
reference to more than one heaven in Second
Corinthians 12:2. Most Bible scholars agree that the
Apostle Paul was talking about himself in this passage.
    2 CORINTHIANS 12:2-4
2 I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago,
(whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of
the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such an one
caught up to THE THIRD HEAVEN.
3 And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out
of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;)
    4 How that he was caught up into
    PARADISE           [Heaven],      and      heard
    unspeakable words, which it is not lawful
    for a man to utter.
    It stands to reason if there's a third Heaven there
also has to be a first and a second heaven, otherwise
there would be no point for the Scriptures to mention a


                           19
                       The Triumphant Church


third Heaven.
   The first of the three heavens right above us is what
we call the atmospheric heavens, or the "heavenlies."
Beyond that, out in space, is the region where the stars,
sun, moon, and planets are—the stellar heavens or
space—which can be referred to as the second heaven. 1
   Out beyond that, further than science knows about
or has been able to explore, is the third Heaven—the
Heaven of heavens—where God's throne is located.
    We are given some information about the third
Heaven in the Scriptures. For example, we know that
under the New Covenant, Paradise is located in this
third Heaven (Luke 23:43; 2 Cor. 12:4; Rev. 2:7). We
know Jesus is in Heaven at the right hand of God
(Mark 16:19; Heb. 1:3; 4:14).
   And the Bible tells us that Jesus is preparing a
place for believers in Heaven: "In my Father's house
[Heaven] are many mansions: if it were not so, I would
have told you. I go to prepare a place for you" (John
14:2,3).
    And we know with a certainty that believers go to
Heaven to be with Jesus when they die. Jesus said,
"And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am,
there ye may be also" (John 14:3).
    Paul also told us believers go to Heaven when they
die: "... to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.... I
am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and TO BE WITH CHRIST ..." (Phil. 1:21,23).

      The 'Heavenlies' or the High Places

1 Merrill F. Unger, Unger's Bible Dictionary (Chicago, Illinois: Moody Press,
  1957), p. 463.


                                    20
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


    The Bible doesn't mention just one heaven, but it
talks about the "heavenlies." Ephesians 6:12 says that
we don't wrestle against flesh and blood, but we do
wrestle against principalities, powers, rulers of the
darkness of this world, and spiritual wickedness in the
heavenlies or in "high places."
    In 1952 Jesus appeared to me in a vision which I
relate at great length in another chapter. He talked to
me for an hour and a half on the subject of Satan,
demons, and demon possession. One of the things He
said to me was that there were four types, classes, or
categories of demons or evil spirits as Paul listed them
in Ephesians 6.
    Jesus said that in listing these demonic powers,
Paul started at the bottom of the list with the lowest
class of demon and worked up in order of their rank:
principalities, powers, rulers of the darkness of this
world, spiritual wickedness in high places (or as some
translations read "wicked spirits in the heavenlies").
   EPHESIANS 6:12
   12 For we wrestle not against flesh and
   blood,   but against  PRINCIPALITIES,
   against POWERS, against the RULERS OF
   THE DARKNESS OF THIS WORLD, against
   SPIRITUAL    WICKEDNESS      IN   HIGH
   PLACES.
   Below they are listed in their order or rank from the
greatest to the least in power with some explanation
about their rank:
   1. Wicked spirits or spiritual wickedness in high
      places: This highest class exists in the
      heavenlies, not on the earth.
   2. Rulers of the darkness of this world: The highest

                          21
                 The Triumphant Church


       class of demons believers have to deal with on
       the earth.
   3. Powers: The next class or category. They are
      dominated by and receive their instruction from
      the rulers of the darkness of this world.
   4. Principalities: The lowest class. They are ruled
      over and dominated by the other classes and do
      very little thinking on their own.
    I believe we have scriptural grounds for believing
that the first three classes of demons and evil spirits—
principalities, powers, and the rulers of the darkness of
this world—exist in the first heaven, which includes the
air and the atmospheric heavens right above us.
    It is the dwelling place of demons because the Bible
calls Satan the prince of the power of the air (Eph. 2:2).
That is his domain. You can't see them, but they are
there and they dominate and rule anyone on earth who
will let them.
    Out beyond the atmosphere or air in the stellar
heavens is the second heaven where the stars and the
planets are located. I personally believe the second
heaven is what the Bible refers to in Ephesians 6:12 as
the "high places." And that is the domain where wicked
spirits or "spiritual wickedness in high places" rule.
   And out beyond that is the third Heaven, the
Heaven of heavens, the realm of Paradise where God's
throne is. Of course, there are no wicked spirits in God's
realm.

              The Double Kingdom
   So we know that the heavenlies is the domain of
principalities, powers, the rulers of the darkness of this
world, and spiritual wickedness in high places. And

                           22
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


when you understand that Adam forfeited his dominion
to the devil, it makes it easier to understand something
we see in the Scriptures—a double kingdom.
    The double kingdom refers to a wicked kingdom
reigning in the heavenlies, which affects the lives of
men upon the earth. Unseen spiritual forces rule and
dominate men who rule seen earthly kingdoms—if men
let them.
   We are told in Ephesians 6 that we are not dealing
with flesh and blood—with just the natures and
personalities of men on the earth. The Bible says we are
dealing with spiritual entities which rule in the
heavenlies. Therefore, a double kingdom refers to a
kingdom ruled on earth by men who are actually
dominated and influenced by spiritual rulers in the
heavenlies.
    We see examples of this double kingdom in the
Scriptures. For example, the Bible gives us a glimpse of
this double kingdom operating in Ezekiel chapter 28.
   Ezekiel 28:2
   2 Son of man, say unto the PRINCE OF
   TYRUS, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because
   thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I
   am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the
   midst of the seas; yet THOU ART A MAN,
   and not God, though thou set thine heart as
   the heart of God.
   In Ezekiel 28:1-10, a prophetic message is given
through the prophet Ezekiel to the prince of Tyrus, a
man, who was lifted up in pride. We know this refers to
an actual prince of Tyrus who ruled a kingdom because
God said, “... yet thou art a man" (Ezek. 28:2). Angels
and evil spirits are not men. Therefore, this prince of


                          23
                 The Triumphant Church


Tyrus was a man who ruled a kingdom on the earth at
that time.
    Then in the very same chapter in Ezekiel 28:11-19,
another prophetic word is given through Ezekiel, but
this one is addressed to the king of Tyrus, who was not a
man. The king of Tyrus was a wicked spiritual power
ruling in the heavenlies.
   EZEKIEL 28:12,13
12 Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the KING
OF TYRUS, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord
GOD; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and
perfect in beauty.
   13 THOU HAST BEEN IN EDEN THE
   GARDEN OF GOD; every precious stone
   was thy covering ... : the workmanship of
   thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared
   in thee in the day that thou wast created.
    We already saw that this passage refers to Lucifer.
The prince if Tyrus, a man, couldn't possibly have been
in Eden the garden of God. He hadn't even been born
yet. No, this "king of Tyrus" is not referring to a man; it
is referring to a created being, Lucifer, a alien spirit
being who ruled an earthly kingdom from his position of
rulership in the heavenlies (Ezek. 28:13-15).
   In these two beings—the prince of Tyrus, a man,
and the king of Tyrus, a spirit being (Lucifer himself)—
the Bible gives the idea of a double kingdom. A natural
kingdom on the earth is ruled by men, but it is
dominated by a spiritual kingdom ruled by spiritual
wickedness in the heavenlies.

       Double Kingdom in the Book of
                  Daniel


                            24
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


   In the Book of Daniel, we find another example of
the double kingdom. Daniel had been fasting and
seeking God. An angel appeared to him and gave him a
revelation from God.
    DANIEL 10:12,13
12 Then said he [the angel] unto me, Fear not, Daniel:
for from the first day that thou didst set thine heart to
understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, THY
WORDS WERE HEARD, and I AM COME FOR THY
WORDS.
    13 But THE PRINCE OF THE KINGDOM OF
    PERSIA withstood me one and twenty days:
    but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes,
    came to help me; and I remained there with
    the kings of Persia.
   The prince of Persia—a wicked ruler in the
heavenlies—withstood the angel of God in the
heavenlies to prevent him from getting through to
Daniel with God's message. Although the angel came
with the answer the very first day Daniel began to
make supplication, the angel said, “... the prince of the
kingdom of Persia withstood me ..." (Dan. 10:13).
   The angel was talking about a battle that took place
out in the spirit world, in the heavenlies. The angel was
not referring to a man living upon the earth who
opposed him, but to a wicked ruler in the heavenlies.
    On earth there was the physical, earthly kingdom of
Persia with a human prince heading up that kingdom.
But right above that kingdom in the heavenlies was a
spiritual kingdom of darkness, also called the kingdom
of Persia.
    The spiritual kingdom was ruled by a wicked spirit
called the prince of Persia, and that evil spirit


                           25
                 The Triumphant Church


dominated the earthly government of Persia. So this
scripture is referring to a spirit being in the heavenlies
that ruled a region on earth through men who yielded to
him.
   Why didn't this wicked spirit in the heavenlies want
the angel to get through to Daniel with God's message?
For the same reason evil spirits don't want God's
message to get through to people today. Satan and his
hosts don't want God's will to be known upon the earth,
and that's why Satan blinds men's minds from seeing
the truth of the gospel (2 Cor. 4:4).
    In Daniel's case, Satan wanted to keep the angel
from revealing God's plans and purposes to Daniel
about the future. When the prince of Persia withstood
the angel of God, God sent reinforcement by sending
another angel, Michael, to assist in the battle: “... lo,
Michael, one of the chief princes [an angel of God], came
to help me" (Dan. 10:13).
   Finally, on the twenty-first day, the angel got
through the heavenlies to Daniel with God's message in
answer to his prayer. God wanted to reveal to Daniel
what was about to take place on the earth and what
would take place in the future.
    So we see that wicked spirits can dominate earthly
kingdoms and governments. Now let's look at the
influence of demons on individual people's lives on the
earth.

             The Rulers of Darkness
   Let's look specifically at one class of evil spirits
Jesus talked to me about called the rulers of the
darkness of this world (Eph. 6:12). Jesus explained,
"The highest class of demons you will have to deal with


                           26
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


upon the earth are the rulers of the darkness of this
world. They are just exactly what the Word says they
are—they are rulers. They rule the darkness of this
world, and they rule over those who are in the
darkness."
    Jesus explained that rulers of darkness also try to
rule over believers who are not walking in the light of
their redemption, or who don't know or don't exercise
their rights and privileges in Christ.
    Jesus told me that according to His Word, believers
are to take authority over these first three classes of
demons: principalities, powers, and the rulers of the
darkness of this world. He said that if we on earth will
bind the operation of the first three classes of demons,
according to His Word, He will deal with the fourth
class of demons—spiritual wickedness in high places.
   He gave me Matthew 18:18 to substantiate this.
   MATTHEW 18:18
   1 8 . . . Whatsoever ye shall BIND ON
   EARTH shall be bound in heaven [the
   heavenlies]: and whatsoever ye shall LOOSE
   ON EARTH shall be loosed in heaven [the
   heavenlies].
    We are to bind evil spirits in their operation against
us in Jesus' Name, based on the authority of God's
Word (Luke 10:19; Phil. :9,10; Isa. 54:17; Rev. 12:11).
That is what Matthew 18:18 means. as we stand in our
authority in Christ and bind the operation of the first
three classes of evil spirits here in the realm of earth,
that tops them in their operation against us. When we
do that, then Jesus said He will deal with the highest
class of demons, spiritual wickedness ruling in the high
places.


                           27
                 The Triumphant Church


   Jesus went on to explain that the rulers of the
darkness of this world are actually the most intelligent
type of evil spirit believers have to deal with.
   Jesus explained, "It is always one of these rulers of
the darkness of this world that possesses a person. Also,
the rulers of the darkness of this world rule over the
other spirits and tell them what to do.
    "For example, they rule over powers and tell them
what to do. And the powers in turn rule over the
principalities and tell them what to do. The lowest type
of demons have very little authority of their own and do
very little thinking of their own; they are told what to
do."
    Jesus said to me that anyone who is walking in
darkness can be dominated by rulers of darkness. They
rule over all unsaved people and anyone walking in
darkness, including believers who are walking in
darkness.
    That's why sometimes even saved people can yield
to these spirits and let them dominate them if they are
walking in darkness—if they're not in fellowship with
God and walking in the light of His Word. Evil spirits
will dominate believers, if they allow them to—by
consent, ignorance, or disobedience. That's the reason
people, including believers, do certain things and don't
know why they do them.
   Jesus said, "That's why sometimes people who
commit acts of darkness say, 'I don't know what made
me do that.' Or that's why perfectly good people say
about someone else, 'I would never do anything like
that,' and before long, they've done something worse."
   Jesus said that's why sometimes even in someone's
own family, a family member does something strange or


                           28
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


out of character, and other family members say, "What
in the world made him do that? I've never seen
anything like that!"
    The reason they do it is that they are being
dominated by rulers of darkness—demons and evil
spirits. If they're walking in darkness, they are being
ruled over and motivated by those rulers of darkness.
   Jesus gave me First John 5:19 to illustrate what He
was talking about: "And we know that we are of God,
and the whole WORLD lieth in WICKEDNESS
[darkness]" (1 John 5:19).
    Jesus said to me, "Every unsaved man and woman,
regardless of who they are—whether it's your kinfolks
or someone else's kinfolks, your brother, sister, mother,
or father—every unsaved person is in the kingdom of
darkness. And they are ruled or motivated more or less
by these demons or evil spirits who are the rulers of the
darkness of this world."
    Then Jesus said, "Whether they want to admit it or
not, or whether you or anyone else wants to admit it,
that is absolutely the truth." Those who have not been
born again and who have not come into the Body of
Christ are still in the kingdom of darkness. So every
person who is not in the Kingdom of light is still ruled
or dominated to some extent by those demon spirits in
the kingdom of darkness, although they may not know
it (Eph. 2:1-3). That's the reason people do and say
things they said they would never do."
    We see many examples of the unsaved being
motivated by evil spirits. For example, I was preaching
in California one time, and I read in the newspaper that
a twenty-eight-year-old young man had deliberately
drowned his own four-year-old son in the bathtub.


                           29
                 The Triumphant Church


    When the authorities questioned this young man,
they found he was all right mentally. He had no record
of wrongdoing, had a good job, and lived in a fine home.
He had no financial worries, came from a good family
from whom he had inherited part of his wealth, and had
worked in the family business. They couldn't find one
thing wrong with him.
    He told the authorities that there wasn't anything
wrong with him mentally; he wasn't worried, had no
problems, and the child was good. "But," he said, "while
I was bathing him, I suddenly had an uncontrollable
urge to harm him, and a voice told me to drown him. I
yielded to it, and when I came to myself, I was holding
my child under the water. I cried, 'Oh, God, why did I
do that!'"
    You see, he was dominated by evil spirits—rulers of
the darkness of this world—because he was in
darkness; he wasn't saved. But believers don't need to
be dominated by evil spirits because we have been
delivered out of the kingdom of darkness and translated
into the Kingdom of light (Col. 1:13). We are in the light
where Jesus is our Lord. He is the One who is to
dominate us. He is the Ruler over us. He is our Head,
not rulers of darkness.
   Satan is the head of those who are unsaved. If the
unsaved people of this world really knew the truth, they
would run to Christians to find out how to get saved so
they could come out from under Satan's dominion.
    There is a spirit world that is even more real than
this physical world. People need to know that. When
you talk about the spirit world, you have to realize that
God is a Spirit (John 4:24), and that the devil, demons,
and evil spirits also exist in the spirit world, as do
angels—both good and evil. But believers have

                           30
             Origins: Satan and His Kingdom


authority over evil spirits; the unsaved do not, for Satan
is their god.

    Rulers of Darkness Can't Rule in the
                   Light
   The New Testament is a revelation of God's great
plan of redemption. Colossians 1:13 tells us that Jesus
came to deliver us from the power and authority of
devils and evil spirits who rule in the realm of
darkness: "... [Jesus] hath delivered us FROM THE
POWER [authority] OF DARKNESS, and hath
translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son."
   The only place rulers of darkness aren't ruling is
where the light has come. What light? The light of
education? The light of science? No. The light of the
gospel!
     The Word says that believers are the children of
light, not of darkness (1 Thess. 5:5) because we have
been born again into God's Kingdom of light. That's why
it's so important to walk in the light! Walking in the
light of God's Word ensures protection against all of
Satan's evil hosts.
    Jesus pointed out to me that because believers are
children of God or children of the light, they are in the
world but not of the world (John 17:14-16), so they don't
have to be ruled by the devil. However, they allow the
devil to rule over them if they walk in darkness rather
than in the light.
   The devil can also rule over us if we unknowingly
through ignorance of God's Word or willingly give him
permission to rule over us. That's one reason the Bible
exhorts believers to walk in the light! Rulers of
darkness can't rule in the light, so they can't rule those


                           31
                The Triumphant Church


who walk in the light!
   Look at the contrast between the kingdom of
darkness and God's Kingdom of light.
   JOHN 8:12
   12 Then spake Jesus again unto them,
   saying, I am the LIGHT of the world: he
   that followeth me shall not walk in
   DARKNESS, but shall have the LIGHT of
   life [zoe, the life of God].

    JOHN 12:35,36,46
35... Yet a little while is the LIGHT with you. Walk
while ye have the LIGHT, lest DARKNESS come upon
you: for he that walketh in DARKNESS knoweth not
whither he goeth.
36 While ye have LIGHT, believe in the LIGHT, that ye
may be THE CHILDREN OF LIGHT....
    46 I am come a LIGHT into the world, that
    whosoever believeth on me should not
    abide in DARKNESS.

   EPHESIANS 5:14
   14 Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that
   sleepest, and arise from the DEAD
   [SPIRITUAL DARKNESS], and Christ shall
   give thee LIGHT.

   ROMANS 13:12
   12 The night is far spent, the day is at hand:
   let us therefore cast off the WORKS OF
   DARKNESS, and let us put on the ARMOUR
   OF LIGHT.

   2 CORINTHIANS 6:14
   14 Be ye not unequally yoked together with
   unbelievers: for what fellowship hath

                         32
            Origins: Satan and His Kingdom

   righteousness with unrighteousness? and
   what communion hath LIGHT with
   DARKNESS?

    1 JOHN 1:5-7
4 This then is the message which we have heard of him,
and declare unto you, that God is LIGHT, and IN HIM
is NO DARKNESS at all.
5 If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk
IN DARKNESS, we lie, and do not the TRUTH
[LIGHT]:
    6 But IF WE WALK IN THE LIGHT, as he is
    in the light, we have fellowship one with
    another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
    Son cleanseth us from all SIN [DARKNESS].
    Glory to God! Demon powers have no authority to
rule over believers who walk in the light of God's Word
and give Satan no access. Believers can walk in the
light so they won't fall prey to Satan.
    In fact, as believers gain knowledge of God's Word,
light and liberty come. The knowledge of God's Word
brings light (Ps. 119:130), and it is the knowledge of
God's Word which sets us free in every area.




                          33
              Chapter 2
 2   Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit,
            Soul, and Body
   Evil spirits are fallen beings or disembodied spirits.
As disembodied spirits, they seek to inhabit man in
order to have a greater range of expression. As fallen
beings, evil spirits seek to oppress, obsess, and if
possible, to possess mankind.
    In order to understand how demons and evil spirits
can affect mankind, you need to understand the
difference between the spirit, soul, and body of man.
And you need to understand the difference between
demonic oppression, obsession, and possession.
    Let's begin by looking at the difference between the
spirit, soul, and body of man. When we understand that
man is a spirit, he has a soul, and he lives in a body—
we can understand how believers can give place to the
devil in their souls and bodies (Eph. 4:27).

              Man Is a Spirit Being
    Someone has said that man is a three-part being:
part is spirit, part is soul, and part is body. But I don't
like to say it that way because it's misleading. Actually,
man is a spirit; he's not part spirit. He's a spirit being.
He has a soul—mind, will, and emotions—and he lives
in a body.
   When expressed like that, the true nature of man
takes on a different significance than just saying "part"


                            35
                 The Triumphant Church


of him is spirit, "part" of him is soul, and "part" of him
is body.
    In the Bible we see the way God divides man. God
distinguishes the difference between the spirit, soul,
and body of man. If a person s spirit, soul, and body are
one, why does the Bible divide them?
   1 THESSALONIANS 5:23
   23 And the very God of peace sanctify you
   wholly; and I pray God your whole SPIRIT
   and SOUL and BODY be preserved
   blameless unto the coming of our Lord
   Jesus Christ.

   HEBREWS 4:12
   12 For the word of God is quick, and
   powerful, and sharper than any twoedged
   sword, piercing even to the dividing
   asunder of SOUL and SPIRIT, and of the
   JOINTS and MARROW [the body], and is a
   discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
   heart.
    We need to understand man's nature because the
devil works through man's five physical senses and his
unredeemed soul and body to try to defeat him. When a
believer understands that, he can close the door to the
devil by renewing his mind—his soul—and keeping his
body—his flesh—under the dominion of his recreated
spirit. That's essential in standing victorious against
the devil.
    Believers must learn how to let the real man—the
spirit man on the inside—dominate their soul and body.
That will solve many problems as far as the devil is
concerned. As believers let their recreated spirits
dominate, they will learn how not to give the devil any

                           36
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


access—spirit, soul, or body.
    You see, much of what is being called the "devil" or
demonic activity in the church world today is not demon
activity at all. It's man's unregenerated soul and flesh
dominating his recreated spirit. When the believer
understands that, he will readily be able to determine
what is and what is not demonic activity and undergird
his soul to stand strong against the enemy's attacks.
   2 CORINTHIANS 5:17
   17 Therefore if any man be in Christ, HE
   [his spirit—the man on the inside] is A NEW
   CREATURE: old things are passed away;
   behold, all things are become new.
    You need to understand that it's not the outward
man—man's body—that becomes a new creature. It's
the inward man—man's spirit—that becomes a new
creature in Christ. If you had red hair before you were
born again, you have red hair after you are born again.
If you were bald headed before you were saved, you are
still bald headed.
    The outward man doesn't change in the new birth,
and neither does the soul of man—his mind, will, and
emotions. Only the man on the inside changes. Old
things are passed away and all things are become new
in man's recreated spirit when he's born again, not in
his soul or body.
   Because all things have not become new in your
body or soul in the new birth, that means you still have
your outward man to deal with. As long as you are in
your body, you will have the desires of the fleshly carnal
nature and the unredeemed soul to control. And that is
the realm where Satan tries to gain access to man.



                           37
                 The Triumphant Church


         Dividing the Soul and Spirit
    It is easy to distinguish between the body and soul
of man because that difference is obvious. But it is more
difficult to divide or distinguish between man's soul and
spirit. The Bible does not say that man's soul and spirit
are the same thing (1 Thess. 5:23).
    It will help your spiritual growth immeasurably to
know the difference between your spirit and soul,
because to stand strong against the devil you will need
to learn how to renew your mind and feed your spirit.
    To gain a better understanding of your nature, it
would help you to go through this process in your
thinking:
   With my spirit, I contact the spiritual realm.
  With my soul, I contact the intellectual and
emotional realm.
   With my body, I contact the physical realm.
    Hebrews 4:12 tells us that only the Word of God can
divide between the soul and the spirit of man: "For the
WORD OF GOD is quick, and powerful, and sharper
than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of SOUL and SPIRIT, and of the JOINTS and
MARROW [body]...."
    There has not been much sound, biblical teaching
about how to distinguish the difference between the
spirit and soul of man. I've read textbooks used in
theological seminaries, and the way they present this
subject is confusing. Some Bible teachers say that the
soul and the spirit are the same. But the Bible divides
them so it stands to reason they aren't the same thing.
It would be just as unscriptural to say that the spirit
and soul are the same as it would be to say that the


                           38
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


body and soul are the same.

                  The Soul of Man

   JAMES 1:21
   21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and
   superfluity of naughtiness, and receive
   with meekness the engrafted word, which
   is able to SAVE YOUR SOULS.
    The Book of James also makes a distinction between
the soul and the spirit of man. Also, notice that our
spirits are saved or recreated, but in this verse we see
that our souls are not saved in the new birth.
   You see, James wrote this epistle to Christians—to
people whose spirits had already been recreated when
they were born again. But here James told these born-
again believers that their souls weren't born again yet.
    Why aren't our souls saved when we are born again?
Because the new birth is a spiritual birth. It's not an
intellectual birth—a rebirth of man's mind. It's not a
soulish birth—a rebirth of man's soul and emotions.
And it's not a physical birth—a rebirth of man's body.
    The new birth is only a rebirth of man's spirit; it's
not a mental or a physical experience. The baptism in
the Holy Spirit isn't a physical or a mental experience
either. They are both spiritual experiences which
eventually affect the physical and mental realms of
man.
    Although the believer's spirit is recreated in the new
birth, he will have to do something about his soul
himself. If he doesn't do something with his soul, he will
give the enemy access to his life.

             The Saving of the Soul

                           39
                     The Triumphant Church


    James is saying that the Word of God is the only
thing that will save the believer's soul—his mind, will,
and emotions. Then James goes on to tell believers how
to get their souls saved or renewed.
   James told believers that receiving the engrafted
word will save their souls. What does the Bible mean by
the "engrafted" Word?
   According to Vine's Expository Dictionary of Biblical
Words, the word "engrafted" means to implant. 1 The
word "engrafted" carries the idea of a seed rooting itself
and causing growth. So the Word of God implanted or
engrafted into the soul of man has the ability and the
power to change or "save" man's soul.
     That scripture used to bother me because I thought
man's soul was already saved in the new birth. But
then I found out that there is a difference between
man's spirit and his soul and that the soul isn't
recreated—only the spirit is. Actually, the saving of
man's soul is an ongoing process throughout a person's
life.
    In studying demons and their influence on mankind,
why is it important for the believer to know that his
soul isn't saved yet? Because what many Christians are
attributing to Satan is really a problem of their souls
not being saved—their minds and emotions not being
renewed with the Word of God.
    An unrenewed mind is a major area where believers
can give Satan access to them. Therefore, the believer
needs to understand how to receive the engrafted Word
to save his soul, so he can close the door to the devil.
    The word "save" in James 1:21 is the Greek word

1 W. E. Vine, Vine's Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words (Nashville,
  Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, Inc., 1985), pp. 200,201.


                                  40
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


sozo. Sozo is defined as to save, deliver, protect, heal,
preserve, make well, and make whole. So we could read
James 1:21, "... receive with meekness the engrafted
Word, which is able to save, heal, deliver, protect,
preserve, make well, and make your soul whole."
   That means as you actively feed on God's Word, it
saves, delivers protects, heals, preserves, and makes
whole your soul, which is one of your greatest defenses
against Satan.
    You see, if renewing or restoration needs to be done
on the inside of the believer it would have to be in his
soul—in his mind and emotions—not in his recreated
spirit. If a person's spirit has been recreated in Christ,
he doesn't need any restoration in his spirit.
    Is receiving the engrafted Word the only thing the
believer has to do to get his soul saved? No, look at the
next verse: "But BE YE DOERS OF THE WORD, and
not hearers only, deceiving your own selves" (James
1:22). You not only have to hear and receive the Word,
you also have to act on it before it will do you any good.
    Hearing the Word and acting on it is a powerful
defense against Satan, because the Bible says, "Submit
yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will
flee from you" (James 4:7). When you are submitted to
God's Word, you are submitted to God. And as you keep
your soul strong and renewed, it's easier to resist the
devil on every front.
   1 PETER 1:22
   22 Seeing ye have PURIFIED YOUR SOULS
   in OBEYING THE TRUTH [the Word]
   through the Spirit....
   You'll have to be a doer of the Word before it will
profit your soul. Your soul will be saved, delivered,


                           41
                 The Triumphant Church


protected, healed, preserved, made well and whole by
receiving and by doing the Word.
    That puts the responsibility on the believer if
anything is going to be done to his soul, doesn't it? And
it puts the responsibility on the believer if Satan is
going to have an inroad to him through his own soul.
   That's exactly what the Bible is saying. Believers
themselves have to do something about the saving of
their own souls. As they undergird their souls with the
Word, Satan won't have an open door of access to them.
   The major way believers close the door to the devil is
to get their minds renewed with the Word and by
practicing the Word. Many people are trying to cast the
devil out of believers, when the problem is not demonic.
The believer has just never learned to renew his mind,
so he keeps on thinking like he did before he was
redeemed when he was under Satan's dominion. Then
eventually he will start acting in line with his
unredeemed thinking, and soon he'll be dominated by
the devil instead of standing in his authority against
him.
    Actually, the "saving" or the renewing of the soul is
the greatest need of the Church today—not casting
devils out of believers. Since the believer's spirit is the
only part of him that is born again or recreated, his soul
and his body are unchanged and still have to be dealt
with if he is to successfully withstand the devil's
attacks.
    If the believer doesn't deal with his soul and body,
he will continually be opening a door to the enemy. Only
the believer himself can do something about renewing
his soul and bringing his body into subjection to his
spirit. And this is where the believer's major "battle" is
fought.

                            42
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


    There are many Christians who have been saved
and filled with the Holy Spirit for many years, whose
souls are not yet saved. Some Christians have lived and
died and their souls have never been saved, and they've
been tossed to and fro by the devil because of it. That's
absolutely the truth! Their souls weren't renewed,
restored, or made whole by the Word of God, so they
couldn't stand successfully against the attacks of the
devil.
    Now don't misunderstand me. Just because
Christians haven't renewed their minds doesn't mean
they won't go to Heaven when they die. Of course they
will go to Heaven because their spirits are born of God
—they're children of God. But Christians who have
failed to renew their minds forfeit the privilege to enter
into all that belongs to them in Christ while they are
here on earth. And even though they have victory over
the devil in Christ, they never understand how to
successfully stand in that victory because of an
unrenewed mind.

              'He Restores My Soul'
   Let's look at another verse in connection with the
saving of the soul. We've all read Psalm 23 many times.
The psalmist said, "He restoreth my soul..." (Ps. 23:3).
Psalm 23 is a prophetic psalm that belongs to the
Church. It was written in King David's day for the
Church of the Lord Jesus Christ. We are living in Psalm
23 right now because it says, "The Lord is my
shepherd...," and in the New Testament Jesus called
Himself the good shepherd (John 10:11).
   Actually, the word "restoreth" in Psalm 23 and the
Greek word translated "renew" in Romans 12:2 have
about the same meaning. To "restore" carries the

                           43
                 The Triumphant Church


connotation to recover, rescue, restore, reverse. To
"renew" means to renovate or to restore or to make like
new.
   If you had a valuable antique chair, you'd probably
want it restored. It might not even look like it's worth
much. But after it is restored, it is still the same chair,
but it's renewed or made like new, and it looks like a
brand-new chair.
    Man's spirit is not restored or renewed; it is actually
born again or recreated. But man's emotional and
mental realms need to be restored with the Word of
God. The greatest need of the Church today is for
believers' minds and emotions to be renewed or restored
with the Word. The Word, which is spirit and life (John
6:63), has the ability to restore, renew, save, protect,
deliver, and heal the soul of man.

                   'Inner Healing'
    At times, different members of the Body of Christ
get off into spiritual "fads" just like they get off into
fads in other areas. For example, several years ago the
Church got off into the teaching on "inner healing."
That teaching has about run its course now because
folks found out it didn't have long-lasting effects.
    The term "inner healing" is really a misnomer if it's
used to refer to healing in your spirit because your
spirit doesn't need healing—it's been recreated. If you
needed healing or deliverance from hurts on the inside,
it wouldn't be in your born-again spirit because it's been
made brand new. No, it's your soul that needs the help.
How are you going to get all of those hurts in your soul
from the past healed? By thinking in line with the
Word.


                            44
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


    Find Scriptures that pertain to your need. Meditate
on the Word regarding your specific need. Say about
yourself what the Word says, for the Word has the
power to transform your mind and emotions. You talk
about deliverance! That's how you get healed and
delivered! Really, true biblical "deliverance" or
restoration in its fullest sense includes much more than
just deliverance from demonic activity, and it begins in
man's soul.
    Some inner healing was probably the result of some
folks trying psychology with the things of God. The
dictionary defines "psychology" as the science and study
of mind and behavior. But the things of God and the
spirit of man are spiritual—not mental.
    For the natural man, there may be some truth to
what psychologists are saying. But for the born-again
man, what they are saying is not necessarily Bible
truth. For example, in psychology, people dug down into
man and found out that he had something else in him
below the mental consciousness, and they called it the
subconscious mind. But, really, the Bible doesn't
mention a subconscious mind. What people discovered
and tapped into was man's spirit, but they didn't know
what it was.
    Now psychology is fine in its place if the
psychologist is a believer who understands the true
nature of man and takes into account man's spirit, not
just his mind. Actually, in dealing with the natural man
—unsaved people—psychology may have its place
because those folks are still in the natural realm since
their spirits haven't been recreated. Therefore, they can
be dealt with by natural means, such as psychology.
   But you can't deal with the spirit man the same as
you would the natural man. The believer isn't just a

                           45
                 The Triumphant Church


natural, carnal being because his spirit has been
recreated in the likeness and image of God. For the
believer, God's highest and best is for his soul to be
restored and made whole and sound with the Word of
God by the power of the Holy Spirit. And since the
believer is not just a soul or a mind, to deal only with
the believer's mind alone isn't sufficient.
   1 CORINTHIANS 2:14 (Amplified)
   14 But the NATURAL, NONSPIRITUAL
   MAN does not accept or welcome or admit
   into his heart the gifts and teachings and
   revelations of the Spirit of God, for they are
   folly (meaningless nonsense) to him; and he
   is    incapable    of   knowing      them—of
   progressively recognizing, understanding
   and becoming better acquainted with them
   —because      they     are     SPIRITUALLY
   DISCERNED        and     ESTIMATED        and
   APPRECIATED.
    The Word of God says the natural man cannot
comprehend the things of the Spirit of God. Because the
believer is no longer a mere natural man, it makes no
sense to try to apply teachings of the natural man to the
born-again believer who is a spiritual man.
    That is why the believer shouldn't be dealt with in
the same way the natural man of the world is dealt
with—only by natural reasonings and human intellect.
Psychology alone is not adequate to deal with the mind
of the spiritual man, nor with the recreated human
spirit which has been created in the image and likeness
of God.
    Therefore, because man is a spirit, has a soul, and
lives in a body the teaching of "spiritology" is more
important to the believer. I call spiritology the study of

                           46
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


the spirit of man and the things of the Spirit of God.
    Since man is a spirit being, the Body of Christ needs
to know what the Word has to say about man's spirit.
The Word of God is spirit food for recreated spirit
beings—believers.
    I once held a meeting in California, and the pastor
and his wife were busy overseeing the planning and
construction of a beautiful, new church building. But
the pastor's wife became overworked and nervous and
finally had a physical and nervous breakdown. She
went to a doctor, and he suggested she go to a
psychiatrist.
   This pastor's wife had been brought up in a
Pentecostal home where they didn't drink, smoke, or
dance. This psychiatrist decided that the woman's
problem was that she'd never done any of those things,
so he suggested that she start smoking, drinking, and
going to dances. This was his cure for this pastor's wife!
    She took his advice and in the end she lost her mind
completely and had to be institutionalized. Actually,
this woman opened a door to the devil by dealing with
her problems as the world does when she was a new
creature in Christ.
   That particular psychiatrist wasn't born again and
knew nothing about the spiritual realm. He didn't even
know that man is a spirit being. In that sense he knew
nothing about his own nature, so he couldn't help
himself, let alone this poor pastor's wife!
    We need to be careful about mixing the wisdom of
man with the things of God. God told us what to do with
our natural mind and with our physical bodies. He said
to get our minds and emotions renewed with the Word
and to present our bodies as a living sacrifice to Him.


                           47
                 The Triumphant Church


That's God way to keep the door closed to the devil.
    That means you will have to keep your body—your
flesh with its appetites—under subjection to the
recreated spirit man on the inside.
   Keeping your body subject to your spirit is one of the
primary ways you protect yourself against the enemy,
and actually it is one of your greatest defenses against
Satan.
    Then what is man to do about his spirit? How is the
believer going to keep his spirit strong against the
attacks of the enemy? He has to feed his recreated spirit
on God's Word. God's Word is spirit food" for a spirit
being.
   LUKE 4:4
   4....man shall not live by bread alone, but by
   EVERY WORD OF GOD.

   JOHN 6:63
   63 It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh
   profiteth nothing: the WORDS that I speak
   unto you, THEY ARE SPIRIT, and THEY
   ARE LIFE.
    Jesus is using a human term—bread—to convey a
spiritual thought. He's saying that what bread or food is
to the body or to the natural man, the Word of God is to
the spirit man on the inside. The believer is to feed his
spirit on the Word to keep it strong.
    Then you need to charge your recreated spirit by
getting built up in the Holy Ghost: "But ye, beloved,
building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying
in the Holy Ghost" (Jude 1:20). Praying in tongues
charges your spirit like a battery charger charges a
battery. It provides a rest and refreshing even in the


                           48
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


midst of any test or trial the devil would try to bring
against you so you can stay strong against his attacks.
    This is how you keep your spirit strong as a
powerful defense against Satan. Well, how are you
going to get help for your mind, will, and emotions
then? By digging up your past? By getting someone to
pray for you? By getting someone to cast the devil out of
you? No, that's not going to help when the real problem
is that your mind and emotions just need to be renewed
with the Word of God.
   It is a waste of time to try to cast the devil out of
someone whose real problem is an unrenewed mind.
Let's get back to the Word! Let's find out what the Word
has to say about the soul of man, especially the mind of
man where the attacks of Satan are most prevalent.

                 The Mind of Man
   Actually, the Bible has a great deal to say about
man's mind. You begin to talk about the mind, and
some people think you're talking about Christian
Science. But God has given us specific instructions
about the mind and what man is supposed to do to keep
his mind strong so he can stand against Satan, the
enemy of his soul.
   ISAIAH 26:3
   3 Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace,
   whose MIND is stayed on thee: because he
   trusteth in thee.

   PHILIPPIANS 2:5
   5 Let this MIND [attitude] be in you, which
   was also in Christ Jesus.

   PHILIPPIANS 4:6-8

                           49
                 The Triumphant Church

   6 Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by
   prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let
   your requests be made known unto God.
   7 And the peace of God, which passeth all
   understanding, shall keep your hearts and
   MINDS through Christ Jesus.
   8 Finally brethren, whatsoever things are
   true, whatsoever things are honest,
   whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
   things are pure, whatsoever things are
   lovely, whatsoever things are of good
   report; if there be any virtue, and if there
   be any praise, THINK ON THESE THINGS.
   In other words, God is telling us exactly what we
ought to be doing with our minds. We are to keep our
minds and our thoughts "stayed" or focused on God.
    To do that we have to put the Word of God into our
minds by meditating on it. Then our thinking will be in
line with the Word of God, and Satan won't be able to
get a foothold in our thinking.
    The Bible tells us exactly what kind of thoughts we
should be thinking—thoughts that are true, honest,
just, pure, lovely, and of a good report. Think thoughts
in line with the Word, not the enemy's thoughts of
doubt, worry, and discouragement.
   Did you ever stop to think about it? The first thing
God requires of you after you're born again is to change
your thinking.
    God knows that if you are going to keep on thinking
like you did before you were redeemed, you'll open a
door to the devil. And soon you'll be acting just like you
acted when you were still being dominated by the devil
before you were born again.


                           50
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


   The reason God tells us to change our thinking is
that man's mind is the first place where Satan tries to
gain access—even the minds of Christians if they let
him.

     A Renewed Mind Transforms You!

   ROMANS 12:1-2
   1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
   mercies of God, that ye PRESENT YOUR
   BODIES A LIVING SACRIFICE, holy, acceptable
   unto God, which is your reasonable service.
   2 And be not conformed to this world: but
   be ye TRANSFORMED by the RENEWING
   OF YOUR MIND, that ye may prove what is
   that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will
   of God.
   You see, God wants submitted bodies, and He wants
transformed minds. There's a reason for that. He knows
that is your greatest defense against Satan.
    When your mind is renewed with the Word, your
thinking is transformed. When your thinking is
transformed, your acting is transformed. You no longer
think and act like you used to when you were under
Satan's dominion. When your thinking and acting is
transformed—you are transformed.
   Paul was writing to born-again, Spirit-filled
Christians when he told them that they would have to
do something with their bodies and minds or souls. He
was telling believers they will have to present their
bodies as a living sacrifice to God, and see to it that
their minds are renewed with the Word of God.
   EPHESIANS 4:23
   23 And be RENEWED in the spirit of your

                           51
                 The Triumphant Church

   MIND.
    The Bible says when your mind is renewed, you will
know what the good, the acceptable, and the perfect will
of God is for your life (Rom. 12:2). To renew your mind,
you'll have to meditate on the Word of God because the
Word is "spirit and life" which has the ability to renew
the mind of man.
    To meditate on the Word of God means to actively
read, think on, speak, and dwell upon the Word. We are
to meditate on the Word of God, not just with our
spirits, but also with our minds. We are to fill our
minds and our thinking with the Word of God. In the
Old Testament, God told Joshua how to be prosperous
in everything he did, and it was to just stay filled up
with the Word. The Word will work for us too, and we
won't have to spend so much time dealing with the
devil.
   JOSHUA 1:8
   8 This book of the law shall not depart out
   of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate
   therein day and night, that thou mayest
   observe to do according to all that is
   written therein: for THEN thou shalt MAKE
   THY WAY PROSPEROUS, and THEN thou
   shalt have good SUCCESS.
    One translation says, "You'll be able to deal wisely
in the affairs of life " How is success going to come? By
meditating on the Word. How is victory over the devil
going to come? By meditating upon the Word of God.
    Success and victory come in every circumstance by
the Word of God being continually in your mouth and by
acting on the Word. Talk and dwell on the Word, not on
your problems, and the devil won't have much to work


                           52
        Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


with in your life.
   Unless your soul has been renewed with the Word,
your outward man will rule or dominate your spirit
through your soul. Satan has access to your outward
man through your five physical senses. That's why you
need to get your mind renewed with the Word of God so
your spirit, the real you, working with your mind, can
govern your body.
    Success in life over the devil doesn't come by trying
to cast out some kind of an evil spirit all the time. It
comes from getting your mind so filled with the Word of
God that your mind will side in with your spirit. And
your spirit directed by the Holy Spirit will lead you in
all the affairs of life—including out of the traps and
snares of the devil.
   You are to actively meditate on the Word of God
with your mind so your thinking can be changed or
transformed (Ps. 1:1-3). Unless your thinking is
transformed, you can think the devil's thoughts and
begin acting just like unsaved people do. But Romans
12:2 says that renewing your mind transforms you!
That is the way the Bible says you will be transformed,
not by trying to cast a devil out of you.
    Much of what is called "demonic" activity is not
caused by demons at all. It is actually the fruit of a
believer's unredeemed, unrenewed mind—thinking and
acting like the world does. An unredeemed, unrenewed
mind gives access to the devil because the mind is the
doorway through which the devil gains access to people.

     Wrong Thinking Opens the Door to
                the Devil
   Have you ever noticed that one reason people get


                            53
                 The Triumphant Church


depressed is that they think wrong thoughts? Thinking
wrong thoughts can give evil spirits access into the
realm of their souls. For example, sometimes believers
get to thinking about the past and how So-and-so
treated them. Yes, born-again, Spirit-filled people can
get depressed. Of course, the devil tries to help them get
depressed by bringing oppression against them.
    But believers can get depressed simply by allowing
themselves to think on wrong thoughts. That gives
Satan something to work with and it gives him access to
their minds. Satan operates in the realm of the five
senses by using wrong suggestions, thoughts, and
feelings to try to influence people to wrongdoing.
    But the Bible says, "Neither give place to the devil"
(Eph. 4:27). We are not to let the devil into our
thinking. Thinking wrong thoughts is one way believers
give the devil a place in them—through their minds,
thoughts, and emotions. Thoughts of guilt and
condemnation and worry and anxiety are the devil's
thoughts, and he will accommodate believers to think
on the negative side of life.
    Thinking thoughts of guilt and condemnation allow
Satan to take advantage of believers and keep them in
bondage to his lies. Bondage to wrong thoughts hinders
believers from standing in their place of authority in
Christ and exercising their rightful authority over the
devil. In reality, believers are triumphant over the devil
and his weapons of accusation because Jesus triumphed
over Satan in the Cross (Col. 2:15). But if believers don't
stand in that authority, the devil will dominate them.
   Christians who continually think wrong thoughts
can even get to the point in their thinking that they
want to commit suicide. Yes, believers! Then some well-
meaning folks say, "Let's cast the devil out of them!"

                            54
        Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


Actually, it's not a devil problem at all. It's the result of
wrong thinking.
    Certainly Satan will try to accommodate believers to
do things that are wrong. But if Christians who think
wrong thoughts would get their minds renewed with the
Word of God, they wouldn't have trouble with
depression in the first place because their minds would
be closed to the devil.
    Actually, if believers would only train themselves in
every instance to ask, "What does the Word say?" they
wouldn't fall prey to the devil's bondage of depression,
guilt, and condemnation in the first place. They would
be triumphant in Christ—victorious over Satan's wiles
and tactics.
    It would answer so many problems, even regarding
the devil, for Christians just to ask, "What does the
Word say about my situation?" Believers need to train
their minds to think on the Word, not on the devil's
thoughts. A renewed mind thinks on the Word of God.
That's how you stand strong against the devil. An
unrenewed mind thinks on the devil's thoughts. And
that's how you become weak and give way to thoughts
of doubt, worry, fear, guilt, condemnation, and the like.
    Another area where believers can open a door to the
devil is by harboring unforgiveness in their hearts.
Believers need to learn not to dwell on their past
mistakes or on the past mistakes of others because the
enemy of their souls, Satan, will use it to gain an inroad
into their lives.
   ISAIAH 43:25
   25 I, even I, am he that BLOTTETH OUT
   THY TRANSGRESSIONS for mine own
   sake, and WILL NOT REMEMBER THY


                             55
                 The Triumphant Church

   SINS.
    Thinking about your past sins, failures, or mistakes
gives the devil access to your thinking and emotions. If
you've made mistakes but have asked God's forgiveness,
God doesn't remember that you've done anything wrong
(1 John 1:9). So why should you?
    Get your mind renewed about God's lovingkindness
and forgiveness, otherwise, Satan will take advantage
of you. Actually, if Satan can get you thinking negative
thoughts, he'll try to take more and more ground in
your mind and soul. That's why you can't afford to give
him any ground at all in you! When Satan comes to
tempt you to think his negative thoughts, remind him
what God's Word says. You don't need to fall prey to
depression or any other kind of negative thinking.
   Get your mind renewed with the Word! Don't go
back in the past and try to dig up the things you've done
by dwelling on them. The Word says to forget the past
and to strive for your high calling in Christ (Phil.
3:13,14).
    The devil will always try to bring a picture of past
sins to your mind. But when your mind is renewed to
God's love and forgiveness, you'll just laugh at him, and
say, "Mr. Devil, the Word says I've been forgiven. Isaiah
43:25 says God has blotted out my transgressions!
You're just showing me a photo of past failure, but it
doesn't exist anymore." And then you can walk on in
victory.
    When you put the devil in his place with the Word of
God, you're being a doer of the Word (James 1:22)! The
Bible says it's the doer of the Word that is blessed
(James 1:25). God made and fashioned you, so just
follow the instructions He gave in His Word about how


                           56
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


to keep the door closed to the devil. Then you can
become successful in every area of life.

       How Evil Spirits Can Effect the
              Soulish Realm
    You know my testimony about how I was raised up
from the bed of sickness. But my own mother's life was
a tragedy. Demons of worry, depression, and oppression
got into her emotional or soulish realm and held her in
bondage. Yes, she was saved, but she did not know her
rights and privileges in Christ. She did not know how to
renew her mind in order to shut the door on the devil.
Sad to say that as a child of God, she lived below her
privileges in Christ.
   My daddy left us when I was about six years old,
leaving my mother with four little children to raise by
herself any way she could. All the trouble my mother
had in life began to eventually affect her physically,
mentally, and emotionally.
    Finally she even began to lose her sight until she
became totally blind. Doctors couldn't find anything
physically wrong with her, but they said it was
evidently a nervous disorder. She eventually had a
complete physical, nervous, and mental breakdown. For
several years she had mental problems and even tried
to kill herself.
    My mother was a Christian, but she didn't know
how to believe God and appropriate His promises. It
was so sad. Someone might ask, "If she had succeeded
and killed herself, would she have been saved?"
Certainly, she would have been saved! She was born
again, but she had just allowed evil spirits of worry and
fear to affect her mentally, physically, and emotionally.


                           57
                The Triumphant Church


She was sick in her mind just like a person can be sick
in his body.
   And after these incidents were over, she didn't have
any remembrance of attempting suicide. Through her
ignorance of not knowing who she was in Christ and
how to appropriate God's Word, she had allowed
demons of worry and oppression to get into her mind
and emotional realm.

    Deliverance in the Realm of the Soul
    You see, evil spirits can cause problems in the
emotional realm of man. We sometimes act as though
problems don't exist. But the Holy Spirit working in
line with the Word of God always has an answer to
every problem when the natural man does not.
    I was holding a meeting in a certain place, and for
three nights in a row after the service, a young married
woman cried pathetically at the altar. I asked the Lord
to show me how to help her.
    Suddenly I had a vision. I saw this young woman
when she was nine years old coming home from school
one day. And when she came into the house, she found
her mother in bed with a man who wasn't her husband.
You can understand what that would do to the emotions
of a nine-year-old child.
   This woman was in her twenties at the time of my
meeting. I saw in the Spirit that her trouble was in her
marriage. I saw that she had been married two years
but because of this emotional block, she was unable to
consummate the marriage, and it was finally breaking
up the marriage.
   I went to the pastor of the church and asked him if
he knew what was wrong with her. He asked if I did,

                          58
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


and I told him the Lord had shown me her problem. He
told me to go ahead and minister to her. I told the
young woman what the Lord had shown me, and she
said it was exactly what had happened. She loved her
husband but had never been able to be a wife to him. I
told her that it was wrong for her mother to be in bed
with a man she wasn't married to, but that marriage
wasn't wrong.
   After giving her Scripture and talking to her about
the sanctity of marriage, I laid hands on her and cast
the evil spirit out of her soulish realm that had been
holding her in bondage to the past. Then I taught her
how to get into the Word of God and get her mind
renewed, so Satan wouldn't have an entrance back into
her mind and emotions.
    The next year I went back to preach a meeting in
that same church, and she and her husband had a
bouncing baby boy whom they had named after me.
They were happily married. You see, she didn't have an
evil spirit in her spirit. But the evil spirit had gotten
into her emotional realm when she was nine years old
and was still dominating and afflicting her and had to
be dealt with.
    Christians shouldn't need to go to the unsaved for
counsel and help. There is help in God. But there is
more to the study of demonology than just telling people
to cast demons out of everyone they meet. The believer
has his part to play in standing strong against the devil.

                 The Body of Man
   It's important to realize that since your body isn't
born again, it is with your body—your five physical
senses—that you contact this world where Satan is god


                           59
                The Triumphant Church


(2 Cor. 4:4). That's why you, the man on the inside,
must do something with your own body. If you let your
body do whatever it wants to do and let your mind
think anything it wants to think, the devil can get into
your mind and body and dominate you.
    Think about it. Doesn't your body want to do things
that are wrong? Of course it does. Everyone's body does,
no matter how long he's been saved, or how spiritual he
is, because the body hasn't been redeemed. We have a
promissory note on the redemption of our bodies (1 Cor.
15:53). But in this life, we will have to do something
with our own bodies or Satan will take advantage of us
through our flesh.
   The Scripture instructs you what to do with your
body:
   1. You must present your body as a living sacrifice
      to God (Rom. 12:1).
   2. You must crucify or mortify the deeds of the body
      (Col. 3:5).
   3. You must keep your body under subjection to
      your spirit man—the inward man—the real man
      on the inside (1 Cor. 9:27).
    You have control of your body, so you can keep your
body from doing what it wants to do. God said you
could. You don't have to allow Satan to use your body as
an instrument of unrighteousness (Rom. 6:13).
   Remember in Colossians 1:12, it says that God made
us "meet" or able to be partakers of the inheritance of
the saints in light. That means we can walk in the
Spirit and not after the flesh. That means we don't have
to yield to the devil's temptations through our carnal
nature.
   To understand how to obey God's Word about your

                          60
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


body, you'll have to recognize that the Scripture makes
a distinction between man's body—the outward man—
and the real man on the inside—his spirit.

    Man's Body Referred to as a 'House'
    Many times in the Scripture, man's body is referred
to as a "house." You need to know that because evil
spirits can be in a person's house—his body—and yet
not actually in the fullest sense be in the person—in his
spirit. That's because man is a spirit, not a body.
   For example, if you lived in a house that had
termites, that doesn't mean you have termites in you.
The house is just where you live, but you yourself don't
have termites. Well, an evil spirit can try to afflict your
body, but that doesn't mean you have an evil spirit in
you-in your spirit.
    Scripture bears out the fact that man's body is often
referred to as his "house." When man dies physically,
his body dies, but he still lives.
    Paul refers to the body as "the earthly HOUSE of
this tabernacle."
   2 CORINTHIANS 5:1,2,4
1 For we know that if our EARTHLY HOUSE OF THIS
TABERNACLE [man's body] were dissolved, we have a
building of God, AN HOUSE not made with hands,
ETERNAL in the heavens [man's spirit].
2 For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed
upon with our HOUSE which is from heaven....
   4 For we that are in THIS TABERNACLE
   [the body] do groan, being burdened: not for
   that we would be unclothed, but clothed
   upon, that mortality might be swallowed up
   of life.


                            61
                 The Triumphant Church


    The Bible is talking about the inward man and the
outward man here. The outward man is our earthly
house, the body. But there is also an inward man, a
house not made with hands, man's spirit, and that is
eternal. Paul talks about the difference between the
outward man and the inward man.
   2 CORINTHIANS 4:16
   16 For which cause we faint not; but though
   our OUTWARD MAN perish, yet the
   INWARD MAN is renewed day by day.
   The spirit man or the inward man is the same as
"the hidden man of the heart."
    1 PETER 3:3,4
3 Whose adorning let it not be that OUTWARD
adorning [the adorning of the outward man or the body]
of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting
on of apparel;
    4 But let it be THE HIDDEN MAN OF THE
    HEART [the inward man], in that which is
    not corruptible, even the ornament of a
    meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight
    of God of great price.
   By something Paul said, you can see that man's
body is different from the man on the inside.
   1 CORINTHIANS 9:27
   27 But I keep under my body, and bring IT
   [my body] into subjection: lest that by any
   means, when I have preached to others, I
   myself should be a castaway.
    Paul called his body "it." Then who is the "I" that
brought his body into subjection? It's the man on the
inside that has become a new creature in Christ! Paul


                            62
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


made a definite distinction between "it"—his body—and
"I"—the real man on the inside.
    Paul wasn't saying he had to bring himself—the
man on the inside—into subjection. No, he said the man
on the inside had to bring his body into subjection.
    Not obeying this scripture is one of the major areas
where believers unknowingly give Satan access into
their lives. Satan is given a foothold in people's lives
when they allow their bodies or flesh to dominate them,
instead of allowing their recreated spirits to rule and
dominate their flesh.

     Keeping Your Body Subject to Your
                  Spirit
    In First Corinthians 9:27, Paul was saying, "I keep
my body under the subjection of my spirit." That means
Paul didn't let his body do everything it wanted to do. If
the Apostle Paul, this great man of God who wrote
much of the New Testament, had to keep his body
under the dominion of his spirit, evidently his body
must have wanted to do things that weren't right. Paul
had to keep his body under the control and dominion of
his spirit just as we do.
   Too many times believers want to try to cast a
demon out when it's the flesh! You can't cast the flesh
out! Or too many times, folks want God to do something
with their bodies. God is not going to do anything with
your body. After all, it's not His body; it's yours, and you
are the one who has dominion over it.
    When you're born again, your inward man belongs
to God. But then you must make the decision to keep
your body subject to your spirit, which is only possible
as you present your body to God as a living sacrifice.


                            63
                 The Triumphant Church


    In Romans 12:1, Paul talks about the importance of
believers' presenting their bodies to God.
   ROMANS 12:1
   1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
   mercies of God, that YE present your
   BODIES a living SACRIFICE,            holy,
   acceptable unto God, which is your
   reasonable service.
    It astounded me when I fully realized what these
verses were actually saying. Paul wasn't writing to
sinners. He was writing to saints—believers. He was
telling Christians that even though they are born again,
their bodies are not born again, and they will have to do
something with their own bodies.
   If you don't present your body to God as a "living
sacrifice," your body is going to want to do everything it
did before you got saved when you were still under the
dominion of Satan, the god of this world (Eph. 2:2). In
other words, if your inward man, which is a new
creature in Christ, isn't in control of your body, you
leave the door open for evil spirits to have access,
because demons try to dominate man through the soul
and the body.
   I saw this happen in a minister's life. He was a
wonderful Christian—a kind and good man who had
been a pioneer in Pentecost. He had enjoyed excellent
health for years, but in later years he began to have
trouble physically. He eventually had three strokes,
which affected his mind.
   He was partially paralyzed, and at    times he wasn't
himself. He would cuss at his wife       and knock her
around. This woman and her daughter      would pray and
pray about his condition. When he        would pray in


                           64
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


tongues, he would be all right for a while, but he never
got delivered.
    His wife said that after hearing me teach on the
believer's authority, she realized what she should have
done. The stroke had affected her husband's brain, so
he couldn't oversee his own mind and body anymore.
Because of that, the devil took advantage of him.
    He became a different person, partially because of
the stroke, of course, but in his case an evil spirit was
also involved. Saved or unsaved, man can be oppressed
in mind or body by evil spirits. His wife didn't know to
stand against it in the Name of Jesus and take
authority over it.
   After her husband had gone to be with the Lord, his
wife realized she should have stood against Satan and
commanded him to take his hands off God's property. I
assured her that Satan had to obey the Word!

        Protection Against the Enemy
    Keeping your body under subjection to your
recreated spirit is a major defense against Satan. The
Bible says, "Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist
the devil, and he will flee from you" (James 4:7). When
you submit your body to God and don't allow it to do
things that are wrong, it's going to be a lot easier for
you to resist the devil.
    God knows without submitted bodies and
transformed minds, believers won't be able to follow the
leading of the Holy Spirit as they should. The Bible
says, "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the sons of God" (Rom. 8:14).
    It doesn't say, "For as many as are led by the body
or the five physical senses, they are the sons of God." Or

                           65
                      The Triumphant Church


"As many as are led by the soul, they are the sons of
God." Spirit-ruled, Word-based believers have a strong
defense against Satan. Body-ruled and sense-ruled
believers are an open target for Satan and his wiles.
    And if a believer hasn't been taught correctly, when
his body wants to do things that aren't right, the devil
will take advantage of him and mislead him to think he
isn't even saved. Then once the devil gets a believer
under condemnation, he can cheat him out of walking in
his inheritance in Christ, which includes exercising
authority over him.
    But if Christians understand that their body is not
born again and that they must do something about their
own body, they can learn to present it to God as a living
sacrifice by bringing it into subjection to their recreated
spirit. This is one of the most important ways a
Christian takes his place in Christ so he can stand
strong against the devil.
    If we don't get our minds renewed with the Word of
God, our mind will side in with our body against our
spirit. That provides no strong defense against Satan!

       Don't Blame the Devil for Carnality
   What does the word "carnal" mean? According to
Vine's Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words,
the word "carnal" signifies the flesh that is sensual,
controlled by animal appetites, and governed by human
nature instead of by the Spirit of God. 2
    Christians are to walk by faith in God's Word and to
be led by the Holy Spirit—not by their senses. A person
can have all the gifts of the Spirit operating in his life
and still be carnal if he doesn't learn how to keep his

2 Ibid., pp. 89,90.


                               66
       Rightly Dividing Man: Spirit, Soul, and Body


body and soul under the dominion of his spirit.
    The Corinthians were like that. Those believers
were even filled with the Spirit, yet they were held in a
babyhood state of Christianity because they were carnal
or body-ruled and sense-ruled (1 Cor. 3:1,3). They
allowed their five senses to dominate them, rather than
the Holy Spirit.
    Paul said to the Corinthians, “... ye are yet carnal:
for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and
divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as [mere natural]
men?" (1 Cor. 3:1-3). And the Bible say's "For where
envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil
work" (James 3:16).
    If Christians don't develop their spirits but allow
their bodies, minds, and emotions to rule them, they
will remain in a carnal or babyhood state of spirituality.
Carnal Christians easily fall prey to the devil's wiles
through envy, strife, and division.
    Then some Christians think they continually need
evil spirits cast out of them because they are so easily
tossed about by Satan. But, really, they just need to
grow and develop and learn how not to yield to envy,
strife, and division.
    As you learn to yield to the Spirit of God and base
your life on the Word of God rather than on your
feelings or flesh, you grow out of the carnal state of
Christianity where Satan can dominate you.
    Satan doesn't have access to you in the arena of
faith in God's Word, but he does in the realm of the
senses when you are sense-ruled and led by your body
and soul.
   Man is always trying to come up with excuses rather
than relying on what God has already laid down in His

                           67
                  The Triumphant Church


Word. For example, in His Word, God gave us
instructions about what to do with our spirit, soul, and
body as a strong protection against the enemy.
   But man is always trying to find some other way
than God's way to arrive at spiritual maturity, success,
and victory over the devil in every circumstance.
   If he can find an easy way to do things, like blaming
everything on the devil, he'll do it, rather than to live by
the principles in God's Word.
   It is much easier to try to cast a devil out than it is
to take the responsibility to consistently renew your
mind with the Word and keep your flesh under
subjection to your spirit!
   A preacher I once knew understood man's carnal
nature. He saw a title on a billboard that said, "The
Beast and I." That inspired a title for a sermon he was
preaching called, “The Beast That Is in All of Us."
    Did you know there is a beast in all of us? The
"beast" is your your carnal unregenerated human
nature, and you will have that carnal nature to subdue
as long as you are on earth.
   In that sense, we could say there is a "beast" in all of
us. There is a carnal nature in the unregenerated
human nature—in the flesh of man.
    However, the carnal nature is not in your spirit if
you're born again. And, thank God, one day you will
also have a new glorified body (1 Cor. 15:42, 50-54).
Until that day, God tells you in His Word how to stand
strong against your enemy, Satan.




                            68
                Chapter 3
       3   The Devil or the Flesh?
    Some things that folks attribute to the devil are
really nothing more than works of the flesh. It is
important to realize that everything that's wrong in life
is not directly the work of an evil spirit.
    When the Bible talks about keeping the flesh under
the dominion of the spirit, too many times folks think
that only refers to keeping sexual desires under control.
Well, it's true you'll have to keep your body under
subjection in that area. But right on the other hand, did
you ever notice what else the Bible lists as works of the
flesh or the old man nature?

              The Works of the Flesh
   Galatians chapter 5 lists the works of the flesh.
   GALATIANS 5:17,19-21
   17 For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and
   the Spirit against the flesh: and these are
   contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot
   do the things that ye would....
19 Now the WORKS OF THE FLESH are manifest,
which are these; adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness,
20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations,
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
    21    Envyings,       murders,     drunkenness,
    revellings, and such like
   What many folks call works of "the devil," the Bible


                           69
                 The Triumphant Church


calls the works of the flesh. In Ephesians 4:25-32, Paul
lists some of the traits of the "old man"—the flesh or
man's unregenerated nature: lying, stealing, corrupt
communication, bitterness, wrath, anger, clamour, evil
speaking, and malice. And he also describes some of the
traits of the new man in Christ: truthfulness,
tenderheartedness, and forgiveness.
   You can see that keeping the flesh under control or
under the dominion of the new man in Christ involves
more than just keeping sexual desires under control. It
involves keeping all the evil tendencies of the flesh in
check and under the dominion of the recreated spirit.

                'Put Off' the Flesh
   The Bible tells us how to deal with the body and
soul—man's carnal, fleshly nature. We are to "put off"
the old man with his fleshly lusts. And we are to "put
on" the new man in Christ.
   EPHESIANS 4:22-24
   22 THAT YE PUT OFF concerning the former
   conversation [lifestyle] THE OLD MAN, which is
   corrupt according to the DECEITFUL LUSTS;
   23 And [you] be RENEWED in the spirit of your
   MIND;
   24 And that YE PUT ON THE NEW MAN,
   which after God is created in righteousness
   and true holiness.
    Who is to put off the nature of the old man or the
works of the flesh? You are! "You" is the subject of verse
22. God is not going to "put off the old man" for you.
You will have to put off the old man with his envy,
bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, and evil speaking. You
aren't dealing with evil spirits when you put off those


                           70
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


evil tendencies; you are just dealing with your flesh.
   All too often believers try to take the easy way out
and call these evil tendencies of the flesh a "demon" or
an "evil spirit." That way they don't have any
responsibility; they can blame everything on Satan. But
the Bible just calls these evil tendencies man's fleshly
nature, and the believer has to do something about that
himself.
    The only way you can put on "the new man" is to
renew your mind with the Word of God. Putting off the
old man and putting on the new man is part of your
"reasonable service" or your "spiritual worship" (Rom.
12:1,2).
    You've got to keep those evil tendencies and
attitudes under the dominion of your spirit—the man
on the inside—and let the new creature in Christ
dominate. As you "put on" Christ you'll be able to walk
in the Spirit of God and not in the flesh where you are
an easy prey for Satan.
    If you didn't have your flesh and its carnal nature to
deal with, you wouldn't be human. And as long as
you're in your body, you will have your fleshly, carnal
nature to contend with. For example, if someone hits
you and your flesh isn't in subjection to your spirit, it
will want to retaliate and hit him back. That's the way
the carnal nature acts apart from God. If someone hurts
you, your flesh wants to get even and retaliate and hold
bitterness and resentment against the person.
    That's the old "get-even" nature of the flesh. It's not
a devil or demonic activity. It's just the carnal nature of
man left unchecked. "You hurt me and I'll get even with
you." Have you ever heard Christians talk that way?
Flesh is just that way, and that's why you've got to keep
it under the dominion of the man on the inside "...

                            71
                The Triumphant Church


which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness" (Eph. 4:24).

         Put On the God-kind of Love
   Let's look in Colossians chapter 3, to see how the
new creature in Christ acts and to see what we are
commanded to "put on."
    COLOSSIANS 3:12-14
12 PUT ON therefore, as the elect of God, holy and
beloved, BOWELS OF MERCIES, KINDNESS,
HUMBLENESS OF MIND, MEEKNESS,
LONGSUFFERING;
13 FORBEARING ONE ANOTHER, and FORGIVING
ONE ANOTHER, if any man have a quarrel against
any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.
    14 And above all these things PUT ON
    CHARITY, which is the bond of perfectness.
    In verse 13, the phrase "forbearing one another"
means putting up with one another. When we begin to
get agitated and impatient with one another, it isn't
necessarily a devil at work. We just need to exercise
forbearance and forgive one another, even as Christ
forgave us (v. 13).
    The word translated in verse 14 as "charity" is the
Greek word, "agape"—the God-kind of love. We are to
put on love. Putting on love is a protection against the
enemy because then we don't give the devil any place in
us (Eph. 4:27).
    When we're born again, the love of God has been
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost (Rom. 5:5).
But we're going to have to take the love that's in our
hearts and put it on our outward man because the love
of God hasn't been shed abroad in our flesh. If we don't

                          72
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


put on the love of God on our outward man, Satan can
have a heyday in our lives through our flesh.

      Anger—Flesh, Not 'the Irish,' And
              Not the Devil
   I heard one fellow talking about his grandpa. With
the least little provocation, his grandpa would fly off the
handle and go into a rage. This man's grandfather
always used the excuse, "Well, that's just the Irish in
me." No, it wasn't "the Irish" in him. It was the flesh!
   EPHESIANS 4:26
   26 Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun
   go down upon your wrath.
    According to Ephesians 4:26, putting off the old man
and putting on the new man is a choice: "Be ye angry,
and sin not...." That means if you get angry about
something, you don't have to let your flesh take over.
You don't have to lose control of your temper. You have
a choice. You don't have to give in to the dictates of your
fleshly, carnal nature.
    If you let the flesh dominate you, you can get out of
control and do and say things you'll regret later on.
Many people want to blame the devil when they lose
control and go into a rage or a fit of anger. But they're
just giving in to their flesh and letting it dominate
them. And by not keeping their flesh in check, they are
opening a door to the devil.
   Some folks think you can get so "sanctified" that you
won't ever have any more problems with the flesh or
Satan. But the only way you won't have problems with
the flesh or Satan is to die and leave this world!
   A fellow came to me one time after one of my


                            73
                 The Triumphant Church


morning meetings. He said, "Brother Hagin, I want you
to pray that I won't ever have any more trouble with the
devil." I asked, "Do you want me to pray that you'll
die?" He said, "No, I don't want to die." I said, "The only
way you'll never have any more trouble with the devil is
to die and get out of this world!"
   Much of the trouble this man thought was coming
from the devil was really nothing more than his flesh,
but he hadn't learned to distinguish the difference. To
be perfectly honest with you, I'm persuaded that
Christians have more trouble with their flesh than they
do with the devil.
    Often Christians who are having problems with the
flesh think if they could just "get away" from it all, or
move to another state, or change jobs or churches,
things would be different. But you can't get away from
the flesh; moving or changing churches isn't going to
solve the problem if it's your unredeemed flesh you're
dealing with. Wherever you go, your flesh is still going
to be there. You might as well go ahead and stay right
where you are and learn to bring it in subjection to your
recreated spirit.

    The Flesh Has Its Own Lusts And It's
               Not the Devil
    You need to realize something else about the flesh.
It has its own lusts and appetites, and it's not a devil at
work or even demonic activity. Look again at Ephesians
4:22.
   EPHESIANS 4:22
   22 That ye put off concerning the former
   conversation [lifestyle] THE OLD MAN,
   which is CORRUPT according to the


                            74
                  The Devil or the Flesh?

   DECEITFUL LUSTS.
    We can learn something else about the lusts of the
flesh from the Book of Romans.
    ROMANS 1:24-28
24 Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness
through the LUSTS OF THEIR OWN HEARTS, to
dishonour their own bodies between themselves:
25 Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and
worshipped and served the creature more than the
Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.
26 For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections:
for even their women did change the natural use into
that which is against nature:
27 And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of
the woman, BURNED IN THEIR LUST one toward
another; men with men working that which is
unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence
of their error which was meet.
    28 And even as they did not like to retain
    God in their knowledge, God gave them
    over to a reprobate mind, to do those things
    which are not convenient.
    In the margin of my Bible, the word "reprobate" is
defined as a mind void of judgment. The Bible isn't
talking about a spirit of lust here. Notice in verse 27,
the Bible doesn't call this a "spirit of lust." It Just says
those in disobedience burned in their lust toward one
another.
   Verse 24 says, "Wherefore God also gave them up to
uncleanness through the LUSTS OF THEIR OWN
HEARTS...." It's the lust of their own hearts—the
unredeemed thoughts and feelings of man—that caused
those walking in darkness to finally be turned over to a


                            75
                  The Triumphant Church


reprobate mind.
    Then in verse 27 it says they "burned in their lust"
toward one another. That's man's unregenerated nature
apart from God. The Bible doesn't call that a devil; it
calls it the "lusts of their own hearts."
    The flesh—the unredeemed nature of man—has its
own lusts because it is degenerate; it's never been born
again. The lusts of the flesh have nothing to do with a
"spirit" of lust. The flesh has its own appetites or
"fleshly cravings."
   1 PETER 2:11
   11 Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
   strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
   FLESHLY LUSTS, which WAR AGAINST
   THE SOUL.
   As long as you allow your fleshly lusts to dominate
you, you will always have trouble in your soul—your
mind, will, and emotions. And that will give Satan an
open door.
   JAMES 1:13-15
13 Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of
God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither
tempteth he any man:
14 But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of
HIS OWN LUST, and ENTICED.
   15 Then when LUST hath conceived, it
   bringeth forth SIN: and sin, when it is
   finished, bringeth forth DEATH.
   According to this Scripture, it's the lust of a person's
own unredeemed nature that draws him into error.
Some people mistake the corruption that lust, sin, and
death produce, and think it's demonic activity at work.


                            76
                   The Devil or the Flesh?


But it isn't. It's the fruit of the flesh left unchecked.
    Ephesians also talks about the lusts of the flesh and
of the mind or soul.
   EPHESIANS 2:3
   3 Among whom also we all had our
   conversation [lifestyle] in times past in the
   LUSTS OF OUR FLESH, fulfilling the
   DESIRES OF THE FLESH and OF THE
   MIND; and were by nature the children of
   wrath, even as others.

                  Crucify the Flesh
    If an evil spirit is involved trying to work through
your flesh, you have authority over it. The devil and evil
spirits have no dominion over you, as long as you're
walking in line with the Word and doing what you’re
supposed to with your flesh. Stand against Satan and
his wiles, because the Bible says he has to flee (James
4:7).
    But if it’s just the flesh you’re dealing with, you
won’t be able to cast it out like you could an evil spirit.
No, you have to crucify or mortify the deeds of the body
(Gal. 5:24; Col. 3:5). Everyone—preacher and layperson
alike—must crucify the lusts of his own flesh and the
cravings of his own carnal nature.
   In Paul’s epistles, he talks about “mortifying” the
deeds of the body.
   COLOSSIANS 3:5
   5 MORTIFY therefore YOUR MEMBERS
   [your body] which are upon the earth;
   fornication,    uncleanness,    inordinate
   affection,   evil    concupiscence,    and


                             77
                 The Triumphant Church

   covetousness, which is idolatry.

   ROMANS 8:5-8,12-14
5 For they that are after the FLESH do mind the things
of the FLESH; but they that are after the SPIRIT the
things of the SPIRIT.
6 For to be CARNALLY MINDED IS DEATH; but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace.
7 Because the CARNAL MIND IS ENMITY AGAINST
GOD: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be.
8 So then they that are in the FLESH [those who are
dominated by their fleshly carnal nature] CANNOT
PLEASE GOD....
12 ... brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
after the flesh.
13 For if ye live after the FLESH, ye shall die: but if ye
through the Spirit do MORTIFY the DEEDS OF THE
BODY, ye shall live.
    14 For as many as are LED BY THE SPIRIT
    OF GOD, they are the sons of God.
   To “mortify” means to kill, become dead, cause to be
dead, put to death, or subdue. Mortifying or crucifying
the flesh is something each believer must do for himself;
God can’t do that for him.
    Your husband, your wife, or your pastor can’t
mortify the deeds of your flesh for you. You must “kill,”
“put to death,” and subdue the lust of your own carnal,
fleshly nature. That is part of your “spiritual worship”
(Rom. 12:1,2) in presenting your body as a living
sacrifice to God. It s part of submitting to God so you
can resist the devil.
   Those who continually practice putting to death the
deeds of their unregenerate nature won’t have the


                            78
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


problems with the devil that carnal Christians do. That
doesn't mean the devil won't try to attack them, but
they will know how to keep from giving the devil any
place in them.
   GALATIANS 5:24
   24 And they that are Christ's have CRUCIFIED
   the FLESH with the AFFECTIONS and LUSTS.

    Crucifying the flesh is not pleasurable. Every
Christian has the same way of escape from falling prey
to the devil through the lusts of his own flesh. But not
every Christian takes the way of escape provided for
him by crucifying his own flesh. Why? Because it hurts
to deny the flesh.
    We don't have much teaching on crucifying the flesh
in the Charismatic Movement. That's one reason some
people have taken the teaching on demons to the
extreme and thought that everything bad that happens
is the devil at work. No, not everything bad is the direct
result of the devil or a demon. Much of what believers
call the devil is just the work of the flesh. And no one
can do anything about your flesh for you; you have to
crucify it yourself (Col. 3:5).
    These folks who are always trying to cast out a devil
want the easy way out. It's easier for a believer to get
someone else to try to cast a demon out of him than it is
to crucify and mortify his own flesh with its lusts and
affections because it hurts to do that.
   Years ago a woman came up to me after one of my
meetings wanting deliverance from a devil. She said,
"Brother Hagin, I wish you would cast this ole
unforgiving spirit out of me." She explained that
another Christian woman had offended her. "Sister So-
and-so did me wrong. God knows I want to forgive her,


                            79
                 The Triumphant Church


but I can't. Please cast this ole unforgiving spirit out of
me!"
   I asked her, "Have you ever forgiven your husband?"
   She said, "Yes, of course."
   I said, "I thought you said you couldn't forgive
because you have an unforgiving spirit in you. No, if you
can forgive one person, you can forgive another person.
The real problem is you don't want to forgive this sister.
You want to hold a grudge against her.
   "You don't need a devil cast out of you. That
unforgiveness is just your flesh, and you're going to
have to deal with that yourself. You just need to do
what the Word of God says in Ephesians 4:32: 'And be
kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven
you.'"
    If God told us to be kind and forgive each other as
He's forgiven us, that means we can do it. But you won't
be able to forgive if you allow your flesh to control you.
But God wouldn't tell you to do something you couldn't
do, because He would be unjust if He did. And God is
not unjust.
    We can forgive just as God forgives because the love
of God has been shed abroad in our hearts (Rom. 5:5).
So most of the time it's not a matter of casting out an
evil spirit; it's a matter of crucifying the flesh so the
love of God in our hearts can be manifested in the
outward man.
   God doesn't have any "quick fixes," and He isn't
running any fast-food joints or ninety-nine cent sales! If
you want to experience a triumphant Christian walk
over the devil, the flesh, and the world, then it costs the
same price as it always has.

                            80
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


   You'll have to be thoroughly Word-based, living by
the principles in God's Word. And you start by
crucifying your own flesh and learning to walk in the
God-kind of love! You're not going to solve all your
problems by just trying to deal with the devil all the
time. Yes, there are times to deal with the devil, but
much of the time it's your own flesh causing you the
problems!

     Jesus' Remedy for 'Flesh' Problems
   MATTHEW 5:29,30
   29 And if thy right eye offend thee, PLUCK IT
   OUT, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable
   for thee that one of thy MEMBERS should
   perish, and not that thy whole body should be
   cast into hell.
   30 And if thy right hand offend thee, CUT IT
   OFF, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for
   thee that one of thy MEMBERS should perish,
   and not that thy whole body should be cast into
   hell.

    Jesus' instructions about how to deal with the flesh
were just as direct as Paul's. In these scriptures, Jesus
wasn't saying to literally pull your eye out or cut your
hand off. That's symbolic. He was saying that
sometimes it will hurt you to deal with your fleshly
lusts and appetites just about as much as it would be to
cut off one of your bodily members.
    It will be painful to your flesh to put these cravings
away from you. That's why the Bible uses the words
"crucify" and "mortify"; it's not pleasant. It hurts the
flesh.
   Just as Paul did, Jesus also emphasized that you are
the one who has to pluck out the evil tendencies, lusts,


                            81
                  The Triumphant Church


appetites, and cravings of your own flesh and put them
away from you. God is not going to do that for you.
    God will strengthen and encourage you, of course,
but He won't do it for you. It won't be pleasant, but this
is one way you become Spirit-ruled and Spirit-led
instead of body-ruled, body-conscious, body-led and
open prey to the devil. Actually, this is one way you
submit to God and resist the devil (James 4:7).

               'God, Take the Snuff!'
    There was a woman down in Texas who came to one
of my meetings. After everyone else left, this woman
prayed at the altar, just bawling and squalling. Every
now and then, she'd yell, "Take it away from me, Lord!
You know I don't want it!" And then she'd get to
screaming like a freight train going through a tunnel.
  I finally said to her, "Sister! What is it you don't
want?"
   She said, "Why, that old snuff."
   I said, "God isn't going to take snuff away from you.
What would He do with it if He had it? He doesn't dip
snuff. You're going to have to do something about it
yourself. You're going to have to crucify your own flesh."
   She said, "Oh, but I couldn't give up good ole snuff!"
   Remember, Jesus said if your hand offends you—
you cut it off. He didn't mean to get an axe and cut your
hand off. But when you put away the lusts and the
cravings of your own flesh, it's going to "crucify," "kill,"
and "put to death" your flesh. Most folks today would
have wanted to cast a "snuff" devil out of that woman!
That's what she wanted too—the easy way out.
   You will have to crucify your own flesh and bring


                            82
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


your fleshly appetites, lusts, and carnal cravings into
subjection. The devil will try to gain access to you any
way he can, and he will use the cravings of your own
flesh to do it if you allow him to. But you don't have to
allow him to.
   When the devil tries to use your flesh to gain access
to you, it doesn't mean you're demon possessed. The
devil will always work through the flesh because your
body isn't redeemed and your five physical senses
contact this world where Satan is god (2 Cor. 4:4). But if
you don't furnish the devil anything to work with—if
you don't give him any place in you—he won't have any
access to you.
    So the Bible says there are lusts of the human
carnal nature which have nothing to do with evil
spirits. You can't cast the flesh out; you have to crucify
or mortify the deeds of the flesh. However, if you
continue to give place to the lusts of your flesh, you will
eventually open the door to an evil spirit.
    The devil will accommodate believers and help them
fulfill the lust of their own fleshly desires. And
eventually an evil spirit can get a hold of believers who
continually indulge in the lust of their carnal, sensual
nature. That is one way Satan gains access, even to
believers.

       Put the Responsibility Where It
                  Belongs
    Have you ever thought about it? The Holy Spirit
helps and encourages believers to do what's right. And
if we yield to the Holy Spirit, we can do what is right.
But even though He helps us do what is right, we can't
really say it is the Holy Spirit who does right—we do.


                            83
                 The Triumphant Church


We ultimately make the choice to yield to the Holy
Spirit and walk in line with the Word and do what's
right. The Holy Spirit assists us, of course, but we have
to yield to His gentle promptings.
    It's the same way with the devil. The devil will help
and encourage people—saved and unsaved alike if they
will allow him—to do what's wrong in every way he
possibly can. The Christian is not under his dominion,
but Satan will still try to work through a Christian's
flesh to get him to do wrong if the person allows it.
   Satan has dominion over those who walk in
darkness, so he can greatly assist them in wrongdoing.
But in one respect, you can't say that all the evil
committed by those in darkness is entirely the work of
the devil either.
    According to the Scriptures, the lust of their own
fleshly nature is also involved in wrongdoing. Just as
the Holy Spirit assists us to do right, the devil assists
anyone walking in darkness to do wrong. But it's still
the person's responsibility what they do because people
have free choice.
   EPHESIANS 2:1-3
   1 And you hath he quickened [made alive], who
   were dead in trespasses and sins;
   2 Wherein in time past ye walked according to
   the course of this world, according to the prince
   of the power of the air, the spirit that now
   WORKETH in the children of disobedience:
   3 Among whom also we all had our conversation
   [lifestyle] in times past in THE LUSTS OF OUR
   FLESH, fulfilling the DESIRES of the FLESH
   and of the MIND; and were by nature the
   children of wrath, even as others.

   The Scriptures tell us that the devil, or "the prince


                           84
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


of the power of the air," works in people for evil, just as
the Holy Spirit works in God's people for good.
   PHILIPPIANS 2:13
   13 For it is God which WORKETH IN YOU both
   to will and to do of his GOOD pleasure.

    People can't lay everything off on the devil and
blame him for all the bad things that happen to them.
Not all evil is directly the work of a demon. Indirectly,
of course, everything that is evil originated with the
devil. But the point I'm trying to make is that people
still have their own part to play in wrongdoing—the
choice is theirs.
    On one side of the ditch, just as believers try to lay
everything off on the devil, on the other side of the
ditch, they can't lay everything off on the Holy Spirit
either. In other words, they cannot put all the
responsibility for their actions on the Holy Spirit.
    The Holy Spirit prompts us and gently leads us, but
we have to yield to Him and respond to His
instructions. We still have to choose to do what is right
or choose to do what is wrong. When you choose to do
wrong, that's not the devil making the choice—it's you.
He may tempt you, of course, but you ultimately make
the choice to whom you are going to yield—Satan or the
Holy Spirit.

           The Pleasures of the Flesh
   This passage in James, which was written to
Christians, also addresses the subject of the works of
the flesh, or "pleasures of the flesh."
   JAMES 4:1-3
   1 From whence come wars and fightings among
   you? come they not hence, even of YOUR LUSTS


                            85
                     The Triumphant Church

    that war in YOUR MEMBER?
    2 YE LUST, and have not: ye kill, and desire to
    have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet
    ye have not, because ye ask not.
    3 Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss,
    that ye may consume it upon YOUR LUSTS.

    According to Vine's Expository Dictionary of New
Testament Words1, the word "lust" is also translated
pleasures. Lusts are "pleasures" of the flesh. Pleasures
of the flesh aren't demons or evil spirits.
    The Holy Spirit uses the believer and his
personality and body to work acts of righteousness
(Phil. 2:13). The devil can also use the believer and his
fleshly, carnal nature and the pleasures of his flesh to
influence him to work acts of unrighteousness and
disobedience.
    That's why you can't just call all lusts of the flesh
"an evil spirit" or "a devil." Lusts can also be the
"pleasures" of the flesh. When a person gets saved, even
though his spirit is recreated, his body still wants to go
right on fulfilling the pleasures of the flesh just as it did
before he got saved.
    For example, if a young man got saved and he was
used to having sexual relationships with women before
he was saved, his flesh will want to keep right on doing
that. That doesn't necessarily mean he needs to have a
devil cast out of him. He just needs to learn to keep his
flesh under subjection to his spirit and walk in line with
God's Word because God does not condone sin.
   Every new believer needs to get into the Word of
God for himself to renew his mind and learn how to
present his body to God as a living sacrifice. As a born-
1 W. E. Vine, Vine's Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words (Nashville,
 Tennessee: Thomas Nelson, Inc., 1985), p. 384.


                                  86
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


again new creature, he will have to learn how to let his
inward man dominate his flesh.
    So not every act of wrongdoing is directly the result
of a devil. Sometimes you hear preachers who want to
cast this demon and that demon out of believers when
demons aren't the cause of the trouble at all—it's just
the unregenerated flesh at work.
    For example, I've heard of ministers trying to cast a
demon of gluttony out of a person. But overeating is a
lust or a pleasure of the flesh. There is pleasure in
eating. When pushed to the extreme, eating is gluttony
and it's wrong, and I'm sure the devil can get involved
with overeating and encourage people in wrongdoing,
just like he can with any extreme. But overeating is not
necessarily a devil at work. It can be a lack of the fruit
of the spirit of temperance or self-control (Gal. 5:23;
Phil. 4:5).
    Although the devil can sometimes get involved in
overeating, on the other hand, it's simply pleasant to
eat. It's not pleasant to fast; the flesh doesn't like to be
denied or crucified. But we are admonished in the Word
to keep the flesh under and fasting helps us do that.

             Extremes and Excesses
    We see some of the same extremes and excesses in
this day about demons as we did in the days of The
Voice of Healing. The Voice of Healing was a magazine
published by Gordon Lindsay, but it was also an
organization of evangelists and ministers. In the days of
The Voice of Healing, some ministers were always
trying to cast demons out of believers.
   For example, when believers came forward for
prayer to be delivered from cigarettes or from some


                            87
                 The Triumphant Church


other addiction, some ministers were always trying to
cast a demon of nicotine or alcohol out of them.
   I don't know that nicotine is a spirit. It is a
substance, and it does damage to the human body. The
devil can get a hold of substance abuse, of course, just
as he can get a hold of anything that's extreme or
harmful to the body.
    But the point is, carnal desires or "pleasures" of the
flesh—including physical addictions—will always try to
dominate you if you don't do something about them
yourself.
   ROMANS 6:6,7,11-16
6 Knowing this, that our OLD MAN is CRUCIFIED
with him [Christ], that the BODY OF SIN might be
destroyed, that henceforth WE SHOULD NOT SERVE
SIN.
7 For he that is dead is FREED FROM SIN....
11 Likewise RECKON ye also yourselves TO BE DEAD
INDEED UNTO SIN, but alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
12 Let not sin therefore reign in your MORTAL BODY,
that ye should obey it in the LUSTS THEREOF.
13 Neither yield ye YOUR MEMBERS [your body] as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield
yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the
dead, and your MEMBERS as instruments of
righteousness unto God.
14 For SIN SHALL NOT HAVE DOMINION OVER
YOU: for ye are not under the law, but under grace.
15 What then? shall we sin, because we are not under
the law, but under grace? God forbid.
   16 Know ye not, that TO WHOM YE YIELD
   YOURSELVES SERVANTS TO OBEY, HIS
   SERVANTS YE ARE TO WHOM YE OBEY;
   whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto

                           88
                 The Devil or the Flesh?

   righteousness?

   The Bible clearly says that we aren't to yield the
members of our body to unrighteousness (v. 13). We
don't have to serve sin, and sin isn't supposed to have
dominion over us because Jesus set us free from sin's
dominion.
    However, you'll have to "reckon" yourself dead to sin
in order to keep your bodily members from serving sin,
because your body will want to keep right on serving sin
if you let it. Your body and its members aren't dead;
that's why you have to "reckon" or count them as dead
to sin.

       Close the Door to Satan In Your
                Thought Life
    In order to "reckon" or "count" your physical
members as dead, you'll have to learn to close the door
to Satan in your thoughts. If you fail in that area, you
will always have problems with the devil because you're
giving him an open door to attack you.
   Satan will always try to enter into a person, saved
and unsaved alike, through the person's thoughts, if the
person will yield and listen to him.
    Thoughts may come—in fact, you can't always keep
thoughts from coming. But you can keep from
entertaining unwholesome and unedifying thoughts. It's
like the old saying, "You can't keep birds from flying
overhead, but you can keep them from building a nest
in your hair!"
    You can't help who comes by and knocks on your
front door, but you have something to say about who
you invite into your home. Thoughts will pop into your
mind, and then the devil will come along and say, "Why,

                           89
                The Triumphant Church


you're not even saved or you wouldn't even think that!"
    At times, the most holy saint finds thoughts in his
mind that his heart resents. Thoughts may come and
thoughts may persist, but thoughts that are not put into
action die unborn.
    The most holy saint who is filled with the Holy
Spirit and in whose life the power of God is
demonstrated—still has to keep the door of his mind
closed to the devil's thoughts. He still has to keep his
mind strong by renewing it with the Word and subduing
his own flesh so he's not open prey for the devil.
    Paul had to keep his body under and bring it into
subjection (1 Cor. 9:27). Wasn't Paul a man of God?
Wasn't he an apostle? Weren't there signs and wonders
and miracles following his ministry? Of course. But
Paul's flesh was not born again or redeemed, just as our
flesh isn't redeemed, and it will always want to do what
is wrong.
    If you keep your body under subjection to your
recreated spirit you won't have all the problems with
the devil some folks have because Satan won't have
anything to work through. And if you'll renew your
mind with the Word, you won't be likely to yield to
Satan's thoughts and suggestions. The Bible talks about
"girding up the loins of your mind." You do that with
the Word so your mind is strong, and you can
successfully resist the thoughts of the enemy.
     Watch what you feed your mind. Someone has said
that the mind is the gateway into the soul. That's why
it's vitally important what you allow your mind to dwell
on. Let me show you how evil spirits can get into a
believer's mind. A man came to see me who had been
the head of the psychology department at a university.
He and his wife came to me for help because he was

                          90
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


having problems with demons.
   He told me, "I majored in psychology and specialized
on the behavior of the sexual criminal." He had many
books in his personal library at home on the sexual
criminal. He wasn't a Christian at the time he began
studying these books.
    In the course of time, he and his wife were saved
and baptized in the Holy Spirit, and he retired as the
head of the psychology department. When he first
retired, he didn't read those books anymore. For two
years he didn't have any problems. But he still kept
those books, and eventually, he started reading them
again.
     When he and his wife came to me for help, he told
me, "I don't know why, but I got all these books down on
the sexual criminal, and I began to read case histories
of child molestation again." He kept feeding that into
his mind and studying about people motivated by the
devil to commit sexual crimes, and an evil spirit got into
his mind. He began having a strong desire to molest
little girls. Finally, he began acting on that desire.
    You need to be careful what you read. You ought to
be as careful about what you read as you are about
what you eat. You wouldn't think about eating poison,
would you? If someone told you, "Don't eat that! It's
poisonous and it will kill you," would you just go ahead
and eat it anyway? No!
    Well, you need to be as careful about what goes into
your mind as you do about what goes into your stomach.
The devil can gain access to your soul through a book,
television, and so forth—by what you put into your
mind.
   This man's wife eventually discovered what he was


                            91
                 The Triumphant Church


doing and filed for divorce. But when he finally came to
see me for help, she came along with him. He told me,
"It just seemed like I couldn't help myself." The devil
got in because he yielded to his flesh. He allowed an evil
spirit into his mind by reading those books. He had
opened the door to the devil, and the devil
accommodated him. Evil spirits were working with his
flesh to drive him to commit these acts.
    He told me, "I know about this subject. I've studied
it and I've taught it. What happens is that the sexual
criminal usually ends up killing one of the little girls he
molests and goes to the electric chair. Brother Hagin,
that thing just got a hold of me. I didn't want to molest
those little girls. Can you help me?"
    As he was talking, the Holy Spirit showed me that
in his case three demons were involved. I knew that by
the word of knowledge. You have to depend on the Holy
Spirit in these areas. You won't know what's operating
against a person unless the Holy Spirit shows you.
    I answered him, "I can help you. I perceive that
there's not just one spirit driving you, but there are
really three spirits involved. First, there is a spirit of
deception that's gotten a hold of you. Then there's a
spirit of lying. And there is also an unclean spirit
involved. I can cast all three of these spirits out of you,
but it won't do a bit of good unless you do something
yourself about the situation."
    When people sin, they have to repent and completely
turn away from wrongdoing before you can help them.
Anyone can be set free from an evil spirit if he's willing.
But what a person does after he's delivered of evil
spirits is of the utmost importance.
   Is he going to feed his mind on the Word of God? Is
he going to get filled with the Holy Spirit and give the

                            92
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


devil no more access to him? Or will he be like the
scripture says: “... EMPTY, swept, and garnished"
(Matt. 12:44)? If a person is delivered from an evil spirit
and isn't taught the Word of God, evil spirits can enter
back into him.
   Also, you can't cast an evil spirit out of someone who
doesn't want to be delivered. If a person wants to keep
an evil spirit, he can. You won't be able to go against
someone else's will and get him delivered if he wants to
keep an evil spirit. That's why you don't just
indiscriminately try to cast devils out of people.
    If a person really has a demon, you would do him an
injustice to cast the demon out of him unless you teach
him to get filled with the Word and the Holy Spirit. It's
the Word dwelling in him that will enable him to resist
Satan's attacks. If he doesn't get himself filled up with
the Word and if he isn't taught how not to give place to
the devil, the Bible says he can end up worse than he
was before (Matt. 12:43-45).
    So I told this retired professor, "If you give me
permission, I can exercise my authority over these three
evil spirits for you. But as soon as you leave here, you'll
have to take a stand against the devil for yourself.
   "You see, there's no use casting evil spirits out of
you and getting you delivered unless you are going to do
something about this situation yourself. Otherwise, the
devil will come back and find your house empty, and
you'll end up worse off than you were before," and I
showed him Matthew 12:43-45.
   I told him, "In this scripture it says the man's house
was clean—swept and garnished—but it was empty. It
hadn't been filled with anything."
   What do you fill a house with after it's been cleaned?


                            93
                 The Triumphant Church


The Word first, and prayer second. Never put prayer
before the Word. And prayer must always be in line
with the Word of God.
   2 PETER 1:4
   4 Whereby are given unto us EXCEEDING
   GREAT AND PRECIOUS PROMISES: that
   BY THESE YE MIGHT BE PARTAKERS OF
   THE DIVINE NATURE, having escaped the
   corruption that is in the world through
   LUST.
    God's Word, His exceeding great and precious
promises, are given to us so we can escape the
corruption of worldly lust. One way we partake of the
divine nature is by feeding on God's Word.
    I told this retired professor, "I'm not going to do a
thing for you—I'm not even going to pray for you unless
you promise me you will do three things."
   He said, "I'll do whatever you say."
   I said, "First, burn those books. Second, don't ever
read books like that again because that's how you let
the devil in. You opened your mind to evil spirits. Third,
read the Word of God and pray in other tongues every
day. Keep full of the Word and full of the Holy Spirit."
    A person can get saved, but if he's not going to walk
with God, read the Bible, go to church, and fellowship
with other Christians, he'll never amount to anything
spiritually. He'll always be open to the attacks of the
devil, and he'll backslide. It's what a person does after
he's saved and filled with the Holy Spirit that
determines how successfully he can stand against the
devil.
   I taught this man how to keep from giving the devil
access to him. Then I cast those evil spirits out of him. I

                            94
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


never even got out of my chair. I just pointed my finger
toward him and said very calmly "I command all three
of you evil spirits to come out of the man in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ."
    In the spirit realm through the discerning of spirits,
I saw those three spirits leave, just like birds flying
away. It is not necessary to see anything in order to
effectively deal with evil spirits. The man didn't see
anything, nor did his wife or my wife. But I was seeing
into the realm of the spirit because the gift of discerning
of spirits was in operation. However, in the natural
there was no physical manifestation in the man
whatsoever.
    About a year later, this man and his wife came to
one of our meetings. They were back together, smiling
and holding hands. He told me, "Brother Hagin, I
haven't had a bit of trouble, praise God! I did just what
you said to do. I burned every single one of those books.
I've stayed in the Word and prayed in tongues every
day, and I've never had another bit of trouble or even
been tempted in that area. It's all gone."
    If this man had been taught to present his body as a
living sacrifice to God, he wouldn't have had that
trouble with evil spirits in the first place, because he
wouldn't have been reading those kinds of books.
    If he had presented his body to God, he wouldn't
have given the devil a place in him—in his thinking or
in his body. But he didn't know his carnal nature wasn't
redeemed and that the devil would accommodate his
flesh, so he indulged his flesh and those spirits were
able to get a hold of him. Actually, if he'd known his
authority in Christ, he could have dealt with those evil
spirits himself.
   In some of these cases, nothing but the flesh is

                            95
                 The Triumphant Church


involved, so there's nothing to "cast out." In other cases,
especially in unnatural cases like this one, evil spirits
are involved. And in some cases it is a combination of
the two, the flesh and the devil working together.
    For example, you can understand how a man might
get physically involved with a woman because a man
has a natural desire for a woman. Of course, all sexual
relations outside of marriage are expressly forbidden by
Scripture (1 Cor. 6:18). But when it comes to a grown
man molesting little children, that's unnatural. That's
beyond just a work of the flesh; an evil spirit is involved
in that kind of unnatural sexual desire, and it will have
to be dealt with for deliverance to be complete.

              A 'Spirit' of Gluttony?
    Once a woman approached my wife after one of our
meetings. She was a young woman, about twenty-eight
years old and obese. She said, "In our prayer group,
they cast the spirit of gluttony out of me, but I've gained
fifty-eight pounds since then."
   My wife asked her, "Well, did they say anything to
you about your diet and about developing good eating
habits?"
   She said, "Oh, no. They just said, 'That spirit is gone
now. You can eat anything you want.'"
    That's pushing the demon issue too far! Wouldn't
that be wonderful if that were true! Go back to the
Bible. What does the Bible say? It says, “... put a knife
to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite" (Prov.
23:2). In other words, you do something about
overeating. You cut off eating so much. I don't care how
many diets you're on, in the final analysis, the only way
to control your weight is for you to control your own


                            96
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


eating habits.
    In some cases, people may need a medical checkup
to see if a chemical imbalance is causing the problem.
But it's too easy to blame overeating and other fleshly
weaknesses on a devil and remove the responsibility
from believers to do something about overeating.
    People are too often looking for a quick fix. "Let's
just cast that demon of gluttony out!" But God doesn't
always provide an "easy" way out because He's not in
the "quick-fix" business. It will cost you a price to curb
your own appetite and deny your own flesh.
   These are some of the extremes that are being
taught and practiced in the Body of Christ today. People
can be gullible by following extreme teaching and
practices in any area. We need to maintain scriptural
balance and go down the middle of the road in every
area and not get in the ditch on one side of the road or
the other.

                   Sanctification
   There's very little teaching about sanctification in
Charismatic circles. As a result, there are some ungodly
practices going on in the Church today. Basically, you
need to understand that sanctification is an ongoing
process. You're not just going to get sanctified one day,
once for all, so that you can never sin again. I don't care
how much of the Word you know, you'll still have to do
your part by setting yourself apart unto godliness.
    In old-time Pentecost, some "holiness" groups taught
about sanctification. Their teaching was probably
extreme in some areas, but they did endeavor to teach
people to live a sanctified lifestyle. Living a sanctified
lifestyle helps keep your flesh under the dominion of


                            97
                The Triumphant Church


your spirit so Satan can't dominate you. Satan can't
dominate you if he can't find a place in you and if you
exercise your authority in Christ.
   What does the Word say about sanctification?
   1 THESSALONIANS 4:1,3-5,7
   1 Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren,
   and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye
   have received of us HOW YE OUGHT TO WALK
   and TO PLEASE GOD, so ye would abound more
   and more....
3 For this is the will of God, even your
SANCTIFICATION, that ye should abstain from
FORNICATION:
4 THAT EVERY ONE OF YOU SHOULD KNOW HOW
TO POSSESS HIS VESSEL IN SANCTIFICATION
AND HONOR;
5 Not in the LUST of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which know not God....
   7 For God hath not called us               unto
   UNCLEANNESS, but UNTO HOLINESS.

   Those two words, "uncleanness" and "holiness," in
verse 7 have to do with the believers' spiritual walk
with the Lord mentioned in verse 1. Believers can't
walk in uncleanness and please God. They'll have to
walk in holiness to please Him.
   Paul used the word "uncleanness" in verse 7. He just
mentioned fornication and the lust of concupiscence in
verses 3 and 5. "Concupiscence" means a desire for
what is forbidden. Let's see how Paul uses this word
"uncleanness" in his epistles, because if you walk in
sanctification and holiness you won't give place to the
devil.
   ROMANS 1:24-28



                          98
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


24 Wherefore God also gave them up to
UNCLEANNESS through the LUSTS OF THEIR OWN
HEARTS, to dishonour their own bodies between
themselves:
25 Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and
worshipped and served the creature more than the
Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.
26 For this cause God gave them up unto VILE
AFFECTIONS: for even their women did change the
natural use into that which is against nature:
27 And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of
the Woman, burned in their LUST one toward another;
men with men working that which is unseemly, and
receiving in themselves that recompence of their error
which was meet.
   28 And even as they did not like to retain God in
   their knowledge, God gave them over to a
   REPROBATE MIND, to do those things which
   are not convenient.

    Remember "reprobate" means a mind void of
judgment. The Bible is referring here to homosexuality,
which     includes   lesbianism.     The     Bible   calls
homosexuality uncleanness. Homosexuality is certainly
not practicing sanctification or holiness, is it? God has
called us not unto uncleanness, but unto holiness!
   Then in Romans 6, we see that sanctification has to
do with one's body.
   ROMANS 6:19
   19 I speak after the manner of men because of
   the infirmity of your FLESH: for as ye have
   yielded your [bodily] MEMBERS servants to
   UNCLEANNESS and to iniquity unto iniquity;
   even so now YIELD YOUR [bodily] MEMBERS
   servants to righteousness unto HOLINESS.



                            99
                 The Triumphant Church


    The Bible speaks of uncleanness in relation to sins
of the flesh.
   2 CORINTHIANS 12:21
   21 And lest, when I come again, my God will
   humble me among you, and that I shall bewail
   many which have SINNED already, and have
   not repented of the UNCLEANNESS and
   FORNICATION and LASCIVIOUSNESS which
   they have committed.

   Notice the word "uncleanness" is linked with the
words "fornication" and "lasciviousness." Another
translation reads "impurity, sexual vice, and
sensuality."
    There hasn't been much teaching on how believers
are to possess their "vessels" or bodies in sanctification
and honor. The Holy Spirit, abiding in the inward man,
dwells within the believer's vessel, his body. And God
has not called your vessel unto uncleanness, but unto
holiness.
    Paul is preaching the same message to every
believer about sanctification. He uses different words as
he wrote to the various churches, but he's basically
teaching believers how to possess their bodies in
sanctification and honor so they can close the door to
the enemy.
   COLOSSIANS 3:5
   5 MORTIFY therefore your members which are
   upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness,
   inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
   covetousness, which is idolatry.

   What does Paul tell believers to "mortify" or make
dead?   The     list  sounds     familiar:    fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, and so forth.


                           100
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


    In Romans chapter 1, the Bible talked about women
having unnatural affection toward women, and men
toward men. Paul called it vile affections. Here he calls
it inordinate affection. That means affection that is not
ordinary, clean, or wholesome. It's not ordinary for a
man to leave the natural use of a woman and to lust
after another man. It's not natural for a woman to want
another woman.
    God made man and woman to desire a member of
the opposite sex within the confines of marriage. Sex is
not wrong in marriage, but it is wrong outside of
marriage. Fornication, adultery, and uncleanness are
wrong. Practicing those things will give Satan great
inroads into your life.
    Believers are to mortify those unclean deeds of the
body, so they can possess their vessels with
sanctification and honor. Some Christians say "I can't
do that." But God said we can. Either He is lying about
it or they are!
    The truth is many people don't want to mortify their
flesh. They just want that old stinking flesh to
dominate them. They want to live in the flesh with its
pleasures and lusts instead of in the Spirit because it's
easier.
   Actually, the greatest "war" the believer will ever
wage is not with the devil, but it is between the flesh
and the spirit.
   GALATIANS 5:16,17
16 This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not
fulfil THE LUST OF THE FLESH.
   17 For the FLESH lusteth against the SPIRIT,
   and the SPIRIT against the FLESH: and these
   are contrary the one to the other: so that ye
   cannot do the things that ye would.


                           101
                   The Triumphant Church


    Paul is writing to Spirit-filled Christians in this
passage. He says, "... the flesh lusteth against the
Spirit...." The King James Version capitalizes the letter
S in the word "Spirit," making the Passage refer to the
Holy Spirit. But Paul isn't talking about the Holy Spirit
in this verse; he's talking about the human spirit.
   As W. E. Vine points out in his Expository
Dictionary of New Testament Words, 2 there is only one
word translated "spirit" from the Greek and that is
"pneuma." Therefore, we have to determine by the
context of the passage whether "pneuma" is referring to
the human spirit or to the Holy Spirit.
    Galatians 5:17 is saying that the flesh "lusteth
against," "wars," or "fights" against the recreated
human spirit. Another translation says, "the flesh
fights against the spirit."
    People are talking a lot about spiritual warfare in
Christian circles today. But the biggest warfare in the
Christian walk is between the flesh and the spirit. Yes,
we have to deal with the spiritual forces of darkness, all
right. But if you get this war between your flesh and
your spirit settled, you won't have to contend with
Satan as much, because you won't be leaving a door
open to the enemy.
    You need to understand the conflict between the
flesh and the recreated human spirit and how to crucify
the flesh so you can possess your vessel in sanctification
and honour (1 Thess. 4:3,4,7). Then you won't be giving
access to the devil.

            The Spirit of the World in the
                       Church

2 Ibid., p. 593.


                           102
                  The Devil or the Flesh?


    If folks do not mortify these evil deeds of the flesh
listed in Colossians 3:5, are they going to get by with it?
   COLOSSIANS 3:6
   6 For which things' sake the wrath of God
   cometh on the children of disobedience.

    Paul is writing here to children of God, saying that
the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
You see, we are living in a world where Satan is god,
and the same spirits that are in the world will try to get
into the Church if we let them. That's why it's so
important for believers to stay holy and separate from
sins and lusts of the world where Satan is god.
    The Bible makes a strong statement about believers
living holy lives separated from the world.
   JAMES 4:4
   4 Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not
   that the FRIENDSHIP OF THE WORLD is
   ENMITY WITH GOD? whosoever therefore will
   be a FRIEND OF THE WORLD is the ENEMY OF
   GOD.

    This verse doesn't mean we aren't supposed to love
sinners or want to help them. But we're not to become
entangled in worldly practices. Friendship with the
world and indulging in worldly practices and pleasures
will open wide the door to the devil in our lives.
   We need to understand that the Bible teaches
separation, not segregation (2 Cor. 6:16,17). That is
where some Christians miss it. Some folks think they
are practicing separation by segregating themselves
and practically isolating themselves from the unsaved.
    But Jesus said we need to be in the world, but not of
the world (John 17:16-18). He meant that we don't have
to abide by the world's standards and act like the world.


                           103
                 The Triumphant Church


Our lives should reflect a separation from the world and
a sanctification and separation unto God in holiness.
We need to be very careful that we don't allow the spirit
of the world to get into the Church—the Body of Christ.
    The spirit of the world got into the Church at
Corinth (1 Cor. 5:1-5). Paul wrote to the Church about
the sexual sin that was being tolerated within that local
body of believers (1 Cor. 5:1). A man was cohabiting
with his stepmother. If you are a student of history, you
know that Corinth was one of the most licentious and
immoral cities of that day. And that immoral spirit had
gotten into the Church.
    In this day, we are living in a time of lightness and
looseness. You can see it in many realms of life. That
same trend is happening in the spiritual realm. There is
such lightness and looseness in the world, as we've
entered into this age of "sexual liberation," as some
people call it. Sin is now considered acceptable by some
as long as you are an adult and your sin doesn't hurt
anyone else. That same spirit has gotten into the
Church.
   In Colossians we can also see another area where
the spirit of the world has gotten into the Church today.
   COLOSSIANS 3:8
   8 ... PUT OFF ALL THESE: anger, wrath, malice,
   blasphemy, FILTHY COMMUNICATION out of
   your mouth.

    We hear so much filthy communication in this day
by unsaved People who are subject to the spirit of the
world. But I am appalled sometimes at the way some
Christians talk. Some of them use filthy communication
too! If they would listen to their spirit, their conscience
would condemn them. But they are not living in the
spirit realm; then they wonder how the devil is getting

                           104
                 The Devil or the Flesh?


into their lives! They open the door themselves with
their own mouths!
    When I was born again, I had never heard anyone
preach on this subject. Although my tongue still wanted
to say some words I'd said before I was saved, after I
was born again, I began listening to my spirit, and I
couldn't talk like that.
    But we are living in a time of looseness and
lightness. You can hear people using these words, but
worse than that, you hear Charismatic people talking
like that too.
   If you are a believer and you are guilty of filthy
communication, you need to straighten up. You need to
obey what God said in His Word: "... put off... filthy
communication out of your mouth" (Col. 3:8). Otherwise,
you are on dangerous ground. And when you're on
Satan's territory, he has access to you.
    Thank God, as believers we know what to do about
Satan, and we know our authority in Christ. We know
how to put off the old man nature with its lusts and
pleasures, and we know how to put on Christ. We can
possess our vessels in sanctification and honor and
learn how to stand strong against all the wiles of the
devil.




                          105
              Chapter 4
 4   Distinguishing the Difference
         Between Oppression,
      Obsession, and Possession
    The primary way Satan tries to gain access to people
is through their mind and body. The degree to which a
person yields to Satan in these areas determines how
much Satan is able to influence him. Since man is a
spirit, he has a soul, and he lives in a body, demons can
affect and influence man in his body and soul (mind,
will, and emotions), yet not be present in his spirit.
    To really understand how demons affect people, it's
also important to understand the difference between
oppression, obsession, and possession. Many people use
these terms interchangeably when they are actually
referring to three separate degrees of demonic
influence.

                    Oppression
   Evil spirits can exert a certain amount of influence
as they seek to oppress mankind. Evil spirits can
oppress anyone, even Christians if they allow it, from
within or without their body or soul.
    Of course, evil spirits have their widest range of
influence if they can embody a human because then
they can express themselves in the natural realm. If
evil spirits can't embody people, they try to exert
influence round about people in the spiritual realm.


                          107
                 The Triumphant Church


Many times believers, even Spirit-filled believers, can
be oppressed by demons from the outside. Satan tries to
oppress us by putting all kinds of pressure on us until
we are keenly aware of that pressure.
   And we need to realize that there are degrees of
oppression. In other words, a person can be more
oppressed or less oppressed. We've probably all
experienced oppression in our lives at one time or
another. For example, sometimes oppression can be
manifested as a bad "mood" that tries to come over us.
That can be the direct result of satanic oppression.
People have also said to me, "Please pray for me. It just
seems like there's a big black cloud hanging over my
head."
   That's satanic oppression. And people are more
oppressed at certain times than they are at other times.
But as we rebuke that oppression in the Name of Jesus,
stand against it and resist it, the devil will flee from us
(Matt. 18:18; Luke 10:19; Phil. 2:9-11; James 4:7).
Believers don't need to live under the oppression of the
enemy. And sometimes when oppression leaves a
person, it feels just like a weight has lifted off his
shoulders.
    Fear is a form of oppression that comes against
many Christians and holds them in bondage and causes
them to stumble again and again. Fear can take ahold
of believers' minds and cause their spirit not to function
as they should—that is, not to be in dominion over their
soul and body.
   Fear can also take ahold of a believer's body and
cause his stomach to tighten up as though some power
had gripped it. That can open the door to despair and
despondency. But the Bible says God has not given us
the spirit of fear (2 Tim. 1:7) so that means we have

                           108
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

authority over it. We have a right to stand against fear
and rebuke it.
    Learn to stand in the power of God's might and use
His glory and power, which is His Word, to fight against
the enemy. God never said you had to fight the enemy
(2 Chron. 20:17). You are to fight the good fight of faith,
which is standing against the enemy by faith in God's
Word (1 Tim. 6:12). When you stand against the enemy
with the Word, fear has to depart from you.
     Fear isn't a friend; fear is an enemy. It isn't to be
accepted, nurtured, or endured. Stand against it and
avoid it like you would avoid sickness and disease.
Speak God's Word to fear and take your authority over
it in the Name of Jesus, and it must depart.
    Anyone's body, even that of a Christian, can be
oppressed by an evil spirit from within or without. Let
me give you an illustration of physical oppression.
Physical oppression can be the direct result of an evil
spirit afflicting a person's body.
    I was ministering in a church once, and a Christian
man came forward in the healing line for prayer. He
said, "The doctors told me that I have a cluster of ulcers
in my stomach as big as a wasps' nest." The doctors
were fearful that his condition might worsen, but the
man wouldn't let them operate on him.
    I said to this man, "Matthew 8:17 says, ... Himself
took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.'" Then I
laid hands on him and prayed. The minute I laid hands
on him, I had a manifestation of the word of knowledge
—a supernatural revelation by the Holy Spirit (1 Cor.
12:8). I knew this man's body was being oppressed by an
evil spirit, and I knew that I had to cast the evil spirit
out of his body before he could be set free from this

                            109
                  The Triumphant Church


stomach condition.
   But I also knew if I didn't explain to the
congregation what I was about to do, it would cause
more harm than good. When ministering in public, if
you just cast an evil spirit out of someone without
explaining it to the congregation, people can think,
That person is saved, filled with the Holy Spirit, and a
member of this church. If he has a devil in him, maybe I
have a devil in me.
    And if people start thinking and talking like that,
they can unknowingly open a door to the devil and an
evil spirit will accommodate them. That's why people
need to exercise wisdom when ministering in public.
    So before I ministered to this man, I explained to
the congregation, "Satan, not God, is the author of
sickness and disease. Satan is indirectly the cause of all
sin, sickness, and disease. Sometimes there can even be
the literal presence of a demon in a person's body that
enforces sickness and disease. When that's the case, the
evil spirit must be dealt with by the power of the Holy
Spirit.
    "In this man's case, an evil spirit is present and
oppressing this man's body and causing these ulcers.
I'm going to cast that evil spirit out of his body. It's not
in his soul or in his spirit."
     I went on to explain, "If you lived in an old house
that had termites in it, that doesn't mean you have
termites in you. Well, your body is just the house you
live in. Your body isn't the real you. The real you is the
spirit man on the inside. And if you're born again, the
spirit man can't have a devil in him. But your body—the
house of your spirit—can have an evil spirit afflicting
it."


                            110
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

    After I explained that to the congregation, I laid
hands on the man again. When I did, the Holy Spirit
also revealed something else to me by a word of
knowledge. I knew by an inward revelation or word of
knowledge what had happened to him that let the evil
spirit into his body in the first place. The man had
opened the door to the devil.
    I had what I call a "mini-vision." I knew that what I
was seeing in the Spirit had occurred two nights before.
I saw this man in bed in the front bedroom of his house.
It was midnight, but he couldn't sleep. I saw him get up
and walk through his house.
    The back porch was screened in. There was a bed
out there, and I saw him just fall across that bed and
roll from side to side holding his stomach because it was
burning like fire. Then I knew by the Spirit of God that
something else was also troubling him, and I knew
exactly what it was. I knew all of this in just a moment
of time through the word of knowledge.
    I said to the man, "Two nights ago at midnight you
were in the front bedroom of your house and you
couldn't sleep, so you finally got up and walked through
your house. You went back to the sleeping porch, and
you fell across the bed, rolling and groaning in pain.
You were holding your stomach because it was burning
like fire.
    "But something else was bothering you too. Your
conscience was bothering you. Now I don't want to
embarrass you. But you are saved, baptized with the
Holy Spirit, and you have been a member of this church
for a number of years. Yet the Lord shows me that
you've never paid your tithes. You don't pay tithes, and
you never have paid tithes."


                            111
                  The Triumphant Church


   He answered, "No, no, I haven't."
   I said, "That's one thing that's bothering you. Not
only was your stomach burning like fire, but your
conscience was hurting you. I can't minister to you until
you get this cleared up with the Lord. What are you
going to do about paying your tithes? Are you going to
obey God or are you not going to obey God?"
    He said, "I'm going to obey God. I'm going to pay my
tithes."
    You see, people can open a door to the devil through
disobedience. Once this man repented and got in line
with God, then I could minister to him. I laid hands on
him and cast out the evil spirit that was oppressing and
afflicting his body and causing the ulcers.
    After I cast the evil spirit out of him, I told him, "On
the way home from the meeting tonight, go buy yourself
a T-bone steak and eat it when you get home." He
hadn't eaten anything except baby food for two years,
and he hadn't worked for two years. He did just that.
Later he went back to the doctors and they x-rayed his
stomach. That cluster of ulcers had completely
disappeared, and he was back on the job the very next
week.
    Now let me give you an example of mental
oppression—of an instance when an evil spirit got ahold
of a Christian's mind. I was ministering in a meeting
and a man came forward for prayer. He had a nervous
condition and couldn't sleep. I laid hands on him and
prayed for him, and he went back to his seat. I kept on
ministering to other people.
   I happened to look over to where this man was
seated. I had my eyes wide open, and God gave me a
manifestation of the gift of discerning of spirits; I saw


                            112
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

into the realm of spirits. I saw what looked like a little
spirit being sitting on this man's shoulder. It looked a
lot like a little monkey, although its face was different.
    This little creature had its arms around the man's
head in a vice-like headlock. I didn't know until
afterward, but this man had already been committed to
a mental asylum. He was just waiting for the
authorities to come and get him to be institutionalized.
    I said to him, "Brother, come back up here, please."
He came back to the front. I spoke to the evil spirit that
was oppressing his mind. (You deal with the evil spirit,
not the person.) I didn't tell anyone I had seen anything,
because it's not always wise to do that in a public
meeting. I just said to this evil spirit, "You foul spirit
that has oppressed and bound this man, I command you
to loose him in the Name of Jesus. Take your hands off
his mind now in Jesus' Name."
   When I said that, that little monkey-like creature
turned loose of the man's head and fell off his shoulder,
and lay at his feet just whimpering and whining. Then
the little creature spoke up and said, "Well, I sure don't
want to. But if you tell me to, I know I have to."
    I replied, "Not only leave him, but leave these
premises in the Name of Jesus," and the little creature
got up and ran out the door. This man lifted both hands
and began to praise God. He told me, "It's like an iron
band snapped from around my head." He had been
mentally oppressed, but he was completely delivered.
   Just because this man's nervousness was caused by
a demon, doesn't mean every case of nervousness is
caused by a demon. You'll have to rely on the Holy
Spirit to know when the literal presence of a demon is
causing the affliction. In your own human knowledge or

                            113
                  The Triumphant Church


wisdom you won't know whether or not an evil spirit is
present. But in this case, I knew by the Holy Spirit that
this man's mental oppression was a direct result of the
presence of an evil spirit.
    That man never did go to the asylum. In fact, years
later he was still doing fine. Thank God for God's power
and the supernatural manifestations of the Holy Spirit.
We are powerless and helpless without the Word of God
and the leading and guidance of the Holy Spirit.

      Christians Can Yield to the Devil
    We've seen how an evil spirit can oppress the body
or the mind a person—saved and unsaved alike. It's
also possible for a Christian to yield to an evil spirit
when he is being oppressed by one and to give it place.
   Scripture bears out the fact that a person can yield
to God and then turn right around and yield to the
devil. Peter did. Although Peter wasn't born again yet
because Jesus hadn't gone to the Cross yet to pay for
our redemption, Peter was used by God to bring forth a
revelation of the Holy Spirit. But then almost
immediately afterward, he yielded to the devil (Matt.
16:20-23).
    But there's a vast difference between yielding to an
evil spirit and being possessed by an evil spirit. It's also
possible to only partially yield to evil spirits. But the
more a person yields to them, the more those spirits
will influence and try to control him (Rom. 6:16). The
good news is that Christians don't have to yield to the
devil or to the flesh. They can learn how to yield to the
Holy Spirit.
   ROMANS 6:16
   16 Know ye not, that to whom ye yield


                            114
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

   yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are
   to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or
   of obedience unto righteousness?

    The Bible teaches that when you yield or submit
yourself to someone, you will eventually become his
servant. Sometimes we only partially yield to the Holy
Spirit, and at other times we are more fully yielded to
Him. I don't know anyone who is totally yielded to the
Holy Spirit. We're all working on it, but we haven't
gotten there yet.
    The same thing is true on the negative side that's
true on the positive side. Just as a person can partially
yield to the Holy Spirit, he can partially yield to evil
spirits, or he can fully yield to them. The more a person
yields to evil spirits, the more ground those spirits will
take in him and eventually try to possess him.
    I'll give you an illustration of a Christian yielding to
the devil. I sometimes tell about my son-in-law, Buddy
Harrison, who at one time had a problem with yielding
to evil spirits. Today Reverend Harrison is the founding
pastor of Faith Christian Fellowship in Tulsa,
Oklahoma, and he is also president of Harrison House
Publishers. But in 1963, he had problems.
    Back then, Buddy was unable to stick with anything
for any length of time. He couldn't keep a job; he'd just
quit and walk off. He wouldn't stay in church. One time
we'd see him in church leading the choir, and
everything would be fine. The next time we'd see him,
he would be out of church. And sometimes he'd walk up
to me and blow cigar smoke in my face. I never said
anything to him. I just loved him. I knew in his case it
was the devil influencing him; it wasn't just his flesh
dominating him. He was a "roller-coaster" or "yo-yo"


                            115
                 The Triumphant Church


Christian, up and down and in and out.
    I was praying one afternoon about my evening
service. Suddenly the Spirit of God spoke to me about
Buddy. He said, "There are three demons that follow
Buddy around." Immediately I had a spiritual vision—a
"mini-vision." I saw Buddy walking down the sidewalk.
I saw three spirits following him like little dogs, except
they didn't look like little dogs. They were monkey-like
and wiry looking. One was on the right edge of the
sidewalk, one on the left edge, and one in the middle of
the sidewalk following after Buddy.
    The Spirit of God said, "These three spirits follow
Buddy. Buddy will turn to the right and yield to the
demon on the right for a while. Then he'll turn back
around and straighten up and act right. Then he'll turn
and yield to the demon on the left for a while. Then he'll
turn back and start acting like a Christian again. Then
he'll yield to the demon that's in back of him for a while.
   "At times Buddy yields to these three evil spirits,
yet at other times he also yields to the Holy Spirit.
That's why it seems like he almost has a split
personality."
    Buddy would begin acting like whichever demon he
was yielding to. Relatives had even remarked, "I don't
understand Buddy. Is he schizophrenic?" Buddy was a
born-again, Spirit-filled Christian. But just because a
person is filled with the Holy Spirit doesn't mean he's
incapable of yielding to the devil. Believers still have a
will of their own; they have free choice.
   When the Lord showed me these three demons
tagging after Buddy like little puppy dogs, I said to the
Lord, "Lord, what do You want me to do about it? Do
You want me to pray about it?"


                           116
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

   "No," He said, "don't pray about it."
   "Well," I said, "what do You want me to do about it
then?"
   The Lord said to me, "You speak to those evil spirits.
Command them in My Name, in the Name of Jesus, to
desist in their maneuvers and stop in their operations
against Buddy."
   I said, "But I'm in Oklahoma. Buddy is in Texas."
   Jesus said, "There is no distance in the spirit realm.
You can speak to spirits where you are that are
operating against someone who is in another location,
and in the Name of Jesus, they have to obey you. You
don't have to be there in person."
   I said, "Tell me how to do that."
   He said, "You simply say, 'In the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, I command all three of you foul spirits
that are following Buddy around to desist in your
maneuvers and stop in your operations against him.'"
   I simply spoke out those exact words that Jesus told
me to say.
    And in the spirit realm, I saw those three spirits
disappear. Then the Word of the Lord came unto me,
saying, "Buddy will have a job within ten days. He will
stay with that job until he does something else I have
for him." I wrote that down on a piece of paper, dated it,
and put it in my billfold.
    The next time I saw Buddy, he said to me, "Dad, I
got a job."
   I said, "I know it."
   I pulled that piece of paper out of my billfold and
handed it to him. He said, "That's exactly right! I got

                            117
                 The Triumphant Church


the job on the tenth day." He stayed with that job and
made a success of it. The owner of the business made
him an assistant manager, and later God called him
into the full-time ministry. He's been walking with God
ever since.

     The Devil, the Flesh, and the World
    Believers can yield to the devil and his wiles and let
the devil dominate them any time they want. Believers
can also yield to the flesh with its lusts and appetites
and let the flesh dominate them. And believers can
yield to the influence of the world and let the world
dominate them.
    Many people would try to cast the devil out of a
believer when he's yielding to the world, the flesh, or
the devil. But the Bible teaches that believers have to
deal with the world, the flesh, and the devil because we
will never be free from these influences until we go to
be with Jesus in Heaven (1 John 4:3,4; 1 John 2:15-17).
But just because believers yield to the world, the flesh,
or the devil, doesn't mean they are demon possessed or
have a demon in them.
    Thank God, the Bible teaches that the believer does
not have to yield to the world, the flesh, or the devil.
The Bible says, if we are born again, through Jesus we
have overcome the world (1 John 5:4,5; John 16:33; 1
John 4:4) Because we are in Christ and Jesus has
overcome the world for us, we don't have to yield to the
influence of the world, nor to the lusts and cravings of
our own physical nature. And we don't have to be
defeated by the devil, because Jesus' triumph over
Satan is our triumph.
   If a Christian opens the door to the devil, the devil


                           118
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

will come in and can eventually possess his body or soul
if given free access to them over a period of time.
However, in the case of a Christian, a demon cannot
inhabit his spirit unless the believer meets the
conditions stated in Hebrews 10:26,27 and Hebrews 6:4-
6. I'll talk about these passages in greater detail later.
    For now I'll simply say that the majority of
Christians never reach a level of spiritual maturity
which would put them in a position to commit the sin
unto death. The sin unto death can only be committed
by a mature Christian by willfully denying Christ with
deliberate forethought (1 John 5:16). So Christians
don't need to be preoccupied with wondering whether or
not they are possessed by the devil in their spirit. If
they are concerned that they might be, it's a sure sign
they aren't! However, Christians can open a door to the
devil in other areas of their lives.
   I'll give an example that shows how a Christian can
unknowingly open a door to the devil. Many years ago I
read about Dr. Lilian Yeomans who was a medical
doctor in a large New York City hospital. She became
hopelessly addicted to drugs and was given up to die by
medical science. Then someone told her about divine
healing, and she was saved and healed by the power of
God and spent the rest of her life teaching about divine
healing.
   Near the end of World War II, Dr. Yeomans became
desperately ill to the point of death, even though she
had taught and ministered on divine healing for more
than forty years. At that time, she was probably about
eighty years old.
   Later I read that Dr. Yeomans had been healed. In
an article she wrote, she explained how she had gotten


                            119
                 The Triumphant Church


sick by unknowingly opening the door to the devil. It
was during World War II, and she had begun to worry
because some of her kinfolk were in those countries
where Hitler dominated.
     Dr. Yeomans said that the worry over her kinfolk
began to bear on her mind, and worry and fear opened
the door to the enemy. Finally, she became desperately
ill. She ran a high fever, lost all her hair, and was at
death's door. She said she repented and asked God to
forgive her for worrying. She said, "God not only
restored my health, but He also restored my hair. Only
my hair didn't grow back white as it was before. I have
a full head of solid black hair!"
    Dr. Yeomans became sick by opening a door to the
enemy through worry and fear. It doesn't make any
difference how long a Christian has been saved or if he's
been preaching or teaching the Word for years. Mature
Christians have to make sure they keep the door shut
on the devil just as much as baby Christians do.
    In Dr. Yeomans' case, she'd walked in what she
called "divine health" for more than forty years and had
never been sick. Dr. Yeomans was a strong Christian
and knew about God's covenant of health. But, you see,
no matter how strong you are in the Lord or how many
years you've preached the Word, the devil will never
leave you alone. And if you yield to him, you can open
the door to him.

         A Christian Whose Mind Was
          Possessed by an Evil Spirit
   I'm going to go into quite a bit of detail in relating
an account of a Spirit-filled minister who became
obsessed in her thinking with worry and fear, until she


                          120
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

finally allowed the devil to possess her thinking, and
she went totally insane.
    In other words, first she was oppressed by the devil's
thoughts. But as she yielded to Satan's thoughts of
worry and fear, she became obsessed with those
thoughts, until finally she opened a door to the enemy
and allowed her mind to become possessed with an evil
spirit.
    This minister's sister told us the following story.
When the woman minister had gone through
menopause, she began to be oppressed with worry. She
allowed herself to brood and became emotionally upset
and increasingly disturbed. She either consciously or
unconsciously yielded to a demon in her mind and
emotions.
    This minister didn't keep her mind focused on the
Word; she became obsessed with worry. She allowed an
evil spirit to gain more and more ground in her thinking
until her mind was taken over by an evil spirit. Finally,
she entirely lost her mind and was possessed in her
mind by that evil spirit and became violently insane.
She tried to kill herself and others.
    She was institutionalized and spent more than two
years in a padded cell for her own protection because
she was violent. She would try to kill herself by butting
her head against the walls. She ate with her fingers like
an animal because she tried to use a knife or a fork to
kill herself.
    The sister of this insane woman wanted my wife and
me to minister to the woman, even though no one was
allowed in her cell. I said I would turn the matter over
to my prayer group so they could begin praying for the
woman. We had a group of women in that Farmersville

                            121
                 The Triumphant Church


church where I was pastoring at that time who could
pray Heaven and earth together. They got answers to
their prayers!
    About ten days after we began praying, the
authorities said this insane woman could come home.
They sent a letter to her family saying she was no
longer violent, but that she would always need
institutional care. Her general health, however, had
deteriorated, and the authorities felt that if the change
in environment didn't help her, she probably wouldn't
live much longer.
    Now here's a minister of the gospel who had gone
insane! Imagine that! People just said, "Oh, the poor
dear. Something happened to her, but we don't know
what it was." But we need to understand what can
happen to people, and how Christians can open a door
to the devil and give him access in their minds and
bodies.
    That's one reason believers need to know how
important it is for them to renew their minds with the
Word of God and to think God's thoughts instead of
thinking on the enemy's thoughts of worry and fear. If
they think the wrong thoughts, they can unknowingly
open a door to the devil. Believers are not subject to the
devil; they have authority over him in Jesus' Name.
They can resist him, and they are not under his
dominion in any way, unless they allow him to take
dominion over them.
    This Full Gospel minister was not subject to the
devil either. She didn't have to give place to Satan in
her thinking. If she would have stood her ground
against worry and oppression with the Word of God and
kept her mind renewed, Satan wouldn't have had access
to her mind. If she had rebuked Satan's oppression and

                           122
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

resisted him, he would have fled from her (Matt. 18:18;
James 4:7).
   On the first Saturday of May 1943, this Full Gospel
minister was brought to our parsonage by her sister.
My wife and I didn't know they were coming. But here's
something I want you to see.
    That morning after breakfast, my wife and I went
about our usual morning chores. I always washed the
dishes and cleaned up the kitchen; it was a habit of
mine. I expected my wife to help me in the ministry, so
it was only right that I help her around the house. All
the time I was cleaning up the kitchen, I was praying in
other tongues, not loudly, but just to myself. I had an
inward urge or leading to do so.
   Then I went over to the church next door and
checked to see that everything was in order for the
service the next day, and as I did, I was continually
praying in tongues. It seemed like I had a divine urge to
pray in other tongues. Don't misunderstand me; the
Holy Spirit wasn't forcing me to pray, for He is a
Gentleman, and He doesn't force us to do anything. He
gently leads. The devil pushes, but the Holy Spirit
gently leads and urges.
    For the rest of the morning I just went about my
business, but I yielded to that urge on the inside to pray
in tongues. When people were around, I just prayed on
the inside, quietly to myself and to the Lord. Then I
walked to the post office to get the mail, because they
didn't deliver mail in those days. The entire time, I
followed that divine urging to pray in other tongues. My
spirit was communicating with God (1 Cor. 14:2,14).
   I would say from eight o'clock in the morning until
about two o'clock in the afternoon, I spent the majority

                            123
                The Triumphant Church


of the time praying in other tongues as I went about my
daily business. And every now and then I'd think to
myself, The Lord must he preparing me for my service
tomorrow. It's going to be a "stem-winder"!
    You see, the Bible says, "For if I pray in an
unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth ..." (1 Cor. 14:14).
And in Jude 20 it says, ... building up yourselves on
your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost." So I
knew God was preparing me and getting me ready for
something, but I thought it was for my Sunday service.
Then about two o'clock, that insane woman was brought
to our parsonage by her sister. She acted like a robot;
she just stared straight ahead like she was in another
world, except that her mouth was continually moving,
almost involuntarily.
    When her sister mentioned that I was a preacher,
immediately the insane woman began to quote
scriptures; the Word just started running out of her
mouth like water out of a faucet, her eyes just blazing
the entire time. The Word wasn't coming out of her
mind, because she was mentally incompetent;
scriptures were coming up out of her recreated, born-
again spirit.
   I'd never seen anyone like this before, and I didn't
know what to do. I made the comment, "Anyone who
can quote Scripture like that must really know the
Lord."
    When I said that, her eyes looked like they flashed
fire. I was standing right in front of her, and, eyes
blazing, she reached up and grabbed her hair and began
pulling it, screaming, "Oh, no, no! No! No! I couldn't
know God! No! No! No! I've committed the
unpardonable sin! No! No!" And her sister had to get
ahold of her and shake her to try to get her calmed

                         124
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

down.
    Her sister finally made her sit down in a chair, but
she just sat staring straight ahead like she was in
another world. I kept watching her, but she didn't blink
or even bat an eye. Her eyes were wide open and she
looked like she was in a trance. No matter what went
on around her, she sat there and never moved a muscle
or batted an eye.
    The sister said to us, "I asked the head of the
institution, 'Is her condition unusual? Is it peculiar to
my sister that she thinks she's committed the
unpardonable sin?' And he said, 'Oh, no. About ninety
percent of the people in the asylum think they've
committed the unpardonable sin.'" That tells you the
devil has something to do with tormenting people in
this area, telling them that they've committed the
unpardonable sin—the sin unto death.
    In this case, this minister had allowed an evil spirit
to get into her soul, and it had convinced her that she
had committed the sin unto death. You see, if you get
sick in your mind through wrong thinking, that opens a
door for the devil to come in. Devils, demons, and evil
spirits have more to do with these things than we
sometimes realize.
    I knew that the woman could be sick in her head or
mind, just as someone could be sick in his stomach. If a
person is sick in his stomach, it just means his stomach
isn't working right. If a person is sick in his mind, it
means his mind isn't working right. So I knew this
woman's mind could just be sick. But I also knew that a
demon could have come in and gotten ahold of her
mind, and it could be the cause of her insanity.
   The demon didn't possess this woman's spirit; it

                            125
                 The Triumphant Church


only possessed her mind because she had opened the
door to it through worry and fear. Satan can't just move
in and occupy a Christian's mind or body unless the
person gives him permission by opening the door to him
either through ignorance or disobedience. In full demon
possession, the demon would have possessed her—
spirit, soul, and body. But she was a Christian, so the
devil couldn't take over her spirit unless she had
willfully denied Christ, which she hadn't.
    How are you going to deal with someone in that
condition, particularly when you can't get through to
the person's mind? At that time, I didn't know. I'd never
dealt with anyone like that. So I said to my wife, "Let's
go get Sister Sylvia."
    Sister Sylvia was a layperson in our church, but she
could pray Heaven and earth together. While we were
waiting in the car for Sister Sylvia to get ready, I began
to talk to the Lord about what had just happened. I
knew if the woman were just sick in her mind, I could
pray for her, anoint her with oil and lay hands on her,
and she could be healed.
   However, I knew if an evil spirit was the cause of
her insanity, it would have to be dealt with by the
power and leading of the Holy Spirit. I told the Lord He
was going to have to help me. I didn't know what to do.
I spent my time praying this way until Sister Sylvia
was ready, and then we all went back to the parsonage.
   We all started praying, and soon we were praying in
the Spirit. We prayed to God for direction for more than
two hours. We weren't praying against the devil; we
weren't combating evil spirits. We were just seeking
God for His direction and about how to minister to this
woman.
   Here's something else you need to understand. The

                           126
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

prayer of faith won't work in every situation. This was
an instance where the prayer of faith wouldn't work
because this woman was not in a position mentally to
agree with us and use her own faith.
    Now don't misunderstand me; the prayer of faith
will work in those situations where it is supposed to
work. But when another person's will is involved, you
won't always be able to pray the prayer of faith unless
the person is in agreement with you (Matt. 18:19).
   Before I could pray the prayer of faith for this
woman, I needed her participation and agreement, but
she couldn't give that because of her mental condition.
Therefore, her deliverance couldn't come about through
the operation of her own faith.
    Some people have tried to make the prayer of faith
work in every situation and in every circumstance. And
in some cases, it's sort of like trying to put a square peg
in a round hole; it won't work. In other words, there are
different kinds of prayer, and they each have their own
rules for their successful operation.
   So we were seeking God for His direction; we
weren't yelling at the devil or trying to drive out a
demon. We needed to get the leading of the Holy Spirit
so we would know how to deal with this insane woman.
    We have to rely on the Holy Spirit in situations like
this. How often we read the scripture, .. Not by might,
nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hosts"
(Zech. 4:6), and yet we go right ahead and try to do
something in our own strength, power, and might, and
nothing happens. No, we will have to learn to rely on
God's Word, His power and might, and His Spirit in
order to be successful in life.



                            127
                 The Triumphant Church


    Actually, when we rely on our own power and might,
we labor and labor, and very little is accomplished. But
if we'll put the Greater One on the inside to work for us,
He will rise up big in us and give illumination to our
minds and direction to our spirits, which we can't get
from any other source. And He always leads us in line
with the holy written Word of God.
    So as we were all seeking God's direction, I prayed,
"Lord, show me how to minister to this woman." When I
said that, the anointing of the Holy Spirit came upon
me, and the Holy Spirit said to me, "Go stand in front of
her and say, 'Come out, you unclean spirit in the Name
of Jesus.'"
    I was reluctant to do that because I'd never been in
a situation quite like that before. When I didn't obey
God, the anointing lifted and left me, and then there
was nothing I could do. You see, casting out a demon in
a situation like this has to be done under the anointing
and power of the Holy Spirit.
    Then the Holy Spirit rebuked me for disobeying. I
said to the Lord, "Lord, let that anointing come on me
again, and I'll obey." I knew there was no use standing
there saying, "Come out!" without the anointing of the
Holy Spirit. If it were just me in the flesh trying to cast
that demon out, I knew nothing would happen. But the
anointing of the Holy Spirit came upon me again, and I
obeyed God and said to the evil spirit, "Come out, thou
unclean spirit in the Name of Jesus."
    The woman didn't look any different afterwards; she
looked and acted just as mentally insane as she had
before. Nothing happened as far as I could tell. Her
sister bundled her up and took her home. But even
though there was no perceptible difference in her, I
knew she was delivered; no one could have told me

                           128
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

differently.
    That's where we miss it sometimes. I knew that the
command of faith had been spoken by the direction and
unction of the Holy Spirit and that the woman was set
free. You see, when the gift of faith is in operation, the
Holy Ghost gives you faith to do whatever He says to do
and it will always work.
   When it comes to dealing with devils in other
people's lives, such as in this woman's situation where
she was unable to give her consent or cooperation, you
must be led by the Holy Spirit in what to do. If the Holy
Spirit doesn't tell you to do something, then you're just
doing it on your own, and you'll fall flat on your face.
However, if people ask you for help and give their
permission, then you can exercise authority over the
devil in their lives in the Name of Jesus (Mark 16:17).
    Once a person is delivered, you need to teach him
how to stand against the devil for himself. Of course, in
dealing with the devil in your own life, you don't need
someone else to rebuke the devil for you. If you are
submitted to God, you have authority over the devil to
resist him, stand against him, rebuke him, and he has
to flee (Luke 9:1; Eph. 6:13; James 4:7).
    This woman was set free by the command of faith on
a Saturday. On the following Monday afternoon, the
sister returned and said to us, "Please pray. My sister is
having a violent attack just like she had when she first
lost her mind." I said, "What of it?" It absolutely
astounded me how calm I was. I knew exactly what was
happening. I'd told that demon on Saturday afternoon
he had to leave, and he knew he had to go. He was just
rending or "tearing" this woman as he departed.
   I explained this to the sister and showed her the

                            129
                 The Triumphant Church


scripture where Jesus rebuked an evil spirit in a
person, and the devil "rent him sore" or convulsed him
before he came out (Mark 9:26). I told the sister, "The
devil knows he has to go, so he is just rending her as
he's departing. After this spell is over, she'll be fine."
   That is exactly what happened. When the attack
was over, this woman's mind was completely restored.
You see, when the command of faith is spoken by the
unction and power of the Holy Spirit, it doesn't
necessarily bring instant results, but it always brings
results.
    The moment this woman's mind was restored, she
was just the same person she'd always been, and her
spiritual walk with the Lord was just as it had always
been. She had no knowledge of being insane for two and
a half years, nor was she aware of trying to kill herself
or others. All that was just a vacant spot in her
memory. Soon afterward the woman was pronounced
well and dismissed from the mental institution.
   The evil spirit had taken over her mind and had
worked through her body, but she didn't have a devil in
her spirit. But at a time in her life when she was
nervous and unstable, she yielded to an evil spirit and it
obsessed her thoughts. She allowed that evil spirit to
gain more and more access in her thinking, and as she
kept yielding to it, the evil spirit finally was able to
possess her soul—her mind, will, and emotions.
   Nineteen years after she was delivered, we checked
up on her. Her sister told us, "Her mind is strong. She
has a good job and she teaches Sunday school."

      Full Possession: Spirit, Soul, and
                    Body


                           130
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

    As we have seen, a person can be oppressed or
obsessed in his soul; that is, in his mind or emotional
realm, even if he is a Christian. And even a Christian
can be oppressed by a demon or an evil spirit in his
body from within or without. But that is not the same
as demon possession.
    Remember, total possession implies giving over
spirit, soul, and body to an evil spirit because to possess
something means to own it. Therefore, it's erroneous
and unscriptural to say a Christian can be possessed by
an evil spirit. Certainly, no Christian can have a devil
in his spirit, or you couldn't call the person a Christian
anymore. We need to be careful with our terminology
and define what we really mean by certain expressions.
    Also, we must realize that there is a vast difference
between being oppressed, influenced by, yielded to
demons, or obsessed by them—and in being fully
possessed by demons. In total possession, a person has
submitted his whole being to be possessed or owned by
evil spirits. And because man has three dimensions to
his being—he is a spirit, he has a soul, and he lives in a
body—he is not fully possessed unless he is taken over
spirit, soul, and body.
    The Greek word that is translated "possessed" also
carries with it the sense of being under the power of or
the influence of a demon. It seems the biblical use of the
word "demonized" has a broad meaning, and it includes
being afflicted or even influenced by demons. In its
widest range to be demonized includes not only
possession, but also oppression, and obsession and can
actually include any activity of the devil which
influences mankind.
   In   other   words,   when     people   are   oppressed,


                            131
                 The Triumphant Church


obsessed, or possessed by the devil, they are
"demonized." So in its broadest sense, the word
"demonized" means to be affected by the works of the
devil.
    Our thinking is not clear along this line many times
because our terms and their meanings aren't clear. For
example, if someone asks, "Can a Christian be
possessed by a devil?" the question the person may be
trying to ask is, "Can a Christian be demonized?" In
other words, Can a Christian be oppressed or obsessed
or influenced by or yielded to evil spirits?
    Expressed that way, the answer is yes. A Christian
can be "demonized" by evil spirits. But, no, a Christian
cannot be fully possessed spirit, soul, and body by evil
spirits. Certainly the devil could eventually possess any
part of a person who continually yields to him and gives
him more and more access. I'll show you how that
applies to a Christian later.
    Sometimes even within full possession, there can be
degrees of possession. In other words, one can be more
fully or less fully controlled by the devil. A person is
partially possessed if only his mind or soul is possessed
by an evil spirit. And even in partial possession the
mind or soul, there are degrees of possession. One can
be more or less possessed and controlled by the devil. In
other words one could be more or less in control of his
own faculties.
   Let's look at a biblical account of full or total demon
possession. The madman of Gadara was possessed by a
demon—spirit, soul and body. When Jesus appeared to
me in the 1952 vision, He talked to me at great length
about this case of demon possession He encountered
when He was on the earth.



                           132
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

   MARK 5:1-20
   1 And they came over unto the other side of the
   sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.
   2 And when he was come out of the ship,
   immediately there met him out of the tombs a
   man with AN UNCLEAN SPIRIT.
   3 Who had his dwelling among the tombs; and
   no man could bind him, no, not with chains:
   4 Because that he had been often bound with
   fetters and chains, and the chains had been
   plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken
   in pieces: neither could any man tame him.
   5 And always, night and day, he was in the
   mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and
   cutting himself with stones.
   6 But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and
   worshipped him.
   7 And cried with a loud voice, and said, What
   have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the
   most high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou
   torment me not.
   8 For he said unto him, Come out of the man,
   THOU UNCLEAN SPIRIT.
   9 And he asked him, What is THY NAME? And he
   answered, saying, MY NAME is LEGION: for we
   are many.
   10 And he besought him much that he would not
   send them away out of the country.
   11 Now there was there nigh unto the
   mountains a great herd of swine feeding.
   12 And all the devils besought him, saying, Send
   us into the swine, that we may enter into them.
   13 And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And
   THE UNCLEAN SPIRITS went out, and entered
   into the swine: and the herd ran violently down
   a steep place into the sea, (they were about two


                            133
                The Triumphant Church

   thousand;) and were choked in the sea.
   14 And they that fed the swine fled, and told it
   in the city, and in the country. And they went
   out to see what it was that was done.
   15 And they come to Jesus, and see him that was
   POSSESSED WITH THE DEVIL, AND HAD THE
   LEGION, sitting, and clothed, and in his right
   mind: and they were afraid.
   16 And they that saw it told them how it befell
   to him that was POSSESSED WITH THE DEVIL,
   and also concerning the swine.
   17 And they began to pray him to depart out of
   their coasts.
   18 And when he was come into the ship, he that
   HAD BEEN POSSESSED WITH THE DEVIL
   prayed him that he might be with him.
   19 Howbeit Jesus suffered him not, but saith
   unto him, Go home to thy friends, and tell them
   how great things the Lord hath done for thee,
   and hath had compassion on thee.
   20 And he departed, and began to publish in
   Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for
   him: and all men did marvel.

    We have much to learn from this account, and we
can make some interesting observations about the
madman of Gadara. But it's important to realize that
this man was not a Christian; he had never been born
again because Jesus had not yet gone to the Cross to
purchase mankind's redemption.
    We also need to understand the difference between a
case such as this madman of Gadara who evidently
wanted to be set free, and a person who willingly yields
to Satan time and time again and doesn't want
deliverance. There is a vast difference between a person
who is struggling to be free from satanic power, and one


                          134
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

who willingly yields himself to Satan again and again
and does not want to be free from Satan's dominion.
    I know from experience that it is relatively easy to
get those delivered who desire to be free; folks who
want to be delivered can be. But very seldom are you
ever able to help those people who continually and
willingly yield to satanic power and do not want to be
set free.
    The Lord met this madman of Gadara with great
compassion (Mark 5:19). By His word of command,
Jesus set the man free (Mark 5:13; Luke 8:32).
Immediately the man's entire appearance was changed.
Before he'd been a wild maniac who tore his clothes off
and cut himself with stones, but after Jesus' command,
the man was normal: "And they come to Jesus, and see
him that was possessed with the devil, and had the
legion, sitting, and clothed, and IN HIS RIGHT MIND:
and they were afraid" (Mark 5:15).
   When the man was set free, he clung to Jesus, his
Deliverer. He wanted to go with Jesus (Luke 8:38). But
Jesus immediately sent this man out to tell his friends
what Jesus had done for him (Luke 8:39).
    Jesus knew that for the man's own benefit, he
needed to begin serving the Lord. Jesus knew the man
needed this discipline of confession and witnessing to
grow in his new-found faith, so He sent the man to
spread the glad tidings of the gospel in his own
hometown: “... Jesus ... saith unto him, Go home to thy
friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath
done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee" (Mark
5:19). Jesus knew that every new advance in walking
toward the light would give this man assurance and
strength in his new-found walk with the Lord.


                            135
                 The Triumphant Church


    We must often trust even the newest convert with
the most bold and difficult service. It strengthens their
Christian testimony and makes them strong in their
faith. I'm not saying to put those who have been
recently saved or delivered in positions of authority.
However, young believers do immediately need to get
involved in service and bold witnessing of what the
Lord has done for them.
   Anyone who has been delivered from sickness,
demonic influence, or any other satanic bondage would
do well to remember this principle. It is especially
important for anyone who has been delivered from
Satan's bondage to immediately get into the discipline
of confession, testimony, and service because it will
immensely strengthen him to boldly speak about the
Lord's delivering power.
    Jesus also knew that before long the whole region of
Decapolis would be so stirred by this one man's
testimony that it would prepare a way for His visit to
that region: "And he [the man] departed, and began to
publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done
for him: and all men did marvel" (Mark 5:20).
    Apparently, cases of insanity are still the same in
nature and cause as they were in the days of Jesus. In
Jesus' day insanity was a matter of demon activity
either directly or indirectly. In this man's particular
case, the literal presence of an evil spirit was the direct
cause of this man's insanity.
    Now let's go back and note in detail several key
elements found in this passage in Mark 5. In Mark 5:13,
evil spirits are called unclean spirits: " . . . And the
unclean spirits ... entered into the swine...."
    There's no such thing as a "clean" evil spirit. As
fallen spirit beings, they are all unclean in nature. So

                           136
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

generally speaking, an "unclean spirit" indicates the
nature of an evil spirit—that it is a fallen eternal spirit
being. Specifically speaking, however, an unclean spirit
refers to its type or kind, as in the case of the madman
of Gadara.
   Another key element to notice in Mark chapter 5 is
that when the evil spirits could no longer oppress,
embody, or possess this man, as a second choice, they
sought embodiment in animals—these demons asked
Jesus for permission to go into the swine (Mark 5:12).
    As eternal evil personalities, if evil spirits do
embody man, they make man what they are. In other
words, a person will take on the character and
personality of the type or kind of evil spirit that is
influencing him.
    I said that in its broadest sense the term "unclean
spirit" refers to spirits of a fallen nature. But used in a
specific sense as in Mark 5, the term "unclean spirit"
refers to the type or kind of evil spirit it is: Referring to
its kind, Jesus said, "For he [Jesus] said unto him,
Come out of the man, THOU UNCLEAN SPIRIT" (Mark
5:8).
   We know that this wasn't the spirit's name, because
in verse 9, Jesus asked its name: “... What is thy
name? ..." The evil spirit replied, "... My name is
Legion ..." (Mark 5:9).
    It's obvious that this man took on the characteristics
of the unclean spirit. The unclean spirit caused the man
to tear off his clothes, to wander around naked, and to
cut himself with stones (Mark 5:5; Luke 8:27).
    It's likely this evil spirit was manifested through
this man in connection with the sexual appetite of man.


                            137
                 The Triumphant Church


This fellow was probably a masochist, deriving sexual
pleasure from suffering physical pain.
    We see that this unclean spirit made the madman of
Gadara what it was, because as soon as the man was
delivered and restored to his right mind, he put on
clothes: "... they come to Jesus, and see him that was
possessed with the devil... sitting, and clothed, and in
his right mind ..." (Mark 5:15).
    Also, when this fellow was restored to his right
mind, he began sitting at the feet of Jesus to learn of
Him. People who are delivered from Satan and sin are
restored to their right minds and begin to sit at the feet
of Jesus to learn of Him.
   Another important element in this passage is found
in Mark 5:2. Only one devil does the possessing. Notice
the Bible says, "... when he [Jesus] was come out of the
ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man
with an unclean SPIRIT." The word "spirit" is singular.
That's the first evidence we have that only one spirit
does the possessing.
    Soon after His encounter with this man, Jesus told
the unclean spirit to come out of the man, "... Come out
of the man, thou UNCLEAN SPIRIT" (Mark 5:8). But
the unclean spirit did not come out of the man. So then
Jesus asked: "What is thy name?" The unclean spirit
answered, "... MY NAME is Legion: for we are many" (v.
9).
    That indicated there was only one spirit that did the
possessing—and it was an unclean spirit named Legion.
In this case, "Legion" refers not only to the name of the
unclean spirit but also to its number. This one evil
spirit that was an unclean spirit was named Legion,
and by its name we know that it brought in with it
many other evil spirits to inhabit the man.

                           138
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

    How else do we know that only one spirit does the
possessing? In Mark 5:15 the scripture says, "And they
come to Jesus, and see him that was POSSESSED with
THE DEVIL, and H A D the LEGION...." In other
words, the whole legion didn't possess the man,
although the legion of devils were in the man too. Only
one devil did the possessing, and he brought with him a
legion of other devils. This is quite typical. It's not
possible to be possessed by a whole legion of devils.
    Jesus said, "It's always a ruler of the darkness of
this world that possesses a person, as in the case of the
madman at Gadara. Some people have said that two
thousand demons possessed him, but that isn't right.
    "Read that passage again. Only one of those evil
spirits possessed him, and this is always the case. The
possessing one will let the others come in with him, but
only one ever possesses a person."

        Scriptural Insights About Evil
                    Spirits
   Matthew 12 gives us more insight about evil spirits
and their operation.
   MATTHEW 12:43-45
   43 When the unclean spirit is GONE OUT OF A
   MAN, he walketh through dry places, seeking
   rest, and findeth none.
   44 Then he saith, I will return into my HOUSE
   from whence I came out; and when he is come,
   he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.
   45 Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven
   other spirits more wicked than himself, and
   they ENTER IN and DWELL THERE....

   First of all, notice what the unclean spirit said in

                            139
                 The Triumphant Church


verse 44: "Then he SAITH, I will return into my house
from whence I came out; and when he is come, he
findeth it empty, swept, and garnished."
    Although we don't know the exact origin of evil
spirits, we do know they are eternal fallen beings or
eternal evil personalities.
   1. As personalities, demons can talk: "Then he [the
      unclean spirit] SAITH..." (Matt. 12:44). Jesus
      said to me, "When a person is fully possessed,
      the demon can speak through the person."
   2. As personalities, demons can think and they
      have volition: "I WILL return to my house ..."
      (Matt. 12:44). The evil spirit made a decision to
      return to his former dwelling place.
   3. As personalities, demons can communicate with
      other evil spirits: "Then goeth he, and TAKETH
      WITH HIMSELF seven other spirits more
      wicked than himself..." (Matt. 12:45).
    When the evil spirit went back to what he called his
"house"—the man he had originally come out of—he
found it empty, swept, and garnished, so he went and
got seven other spirits to inhabit the man with him.
   This indicates a certain amount of intelligence in
the ranks of evil spirits. And the list in Ephesians 6:12
shows us that the devil is well regimented in his work
because we see rank and division in Satan's kingdom.
    Matthew 12 also shows us that the devil is
persistent in his attacks. The devil doesn't let up in his
maneuvers against us: "Then he [the evil spirit] saith, I
WILL RETURN into my house from whence I came
out..." (Matt. 12:44). The devil will always try to return
after he has been cast out of a person. He will endeavor
to go right back to the "house" he has left, and he will

                           140
Distinguishing the Difference Between Oppression, Obsession,
                       and Possession

always keep on in his attempts to entice the person to
do wrong or to bring sickness and disease upon him.
   We can see this principle at work in the case of an
unsaved person. If he gets saved, the devil will always
try to get back into his life. Satan tries to get baby
Christians to do wrong just as they had done before
they were saved, many times trying to influence them
to return to their former lifestyle. That's why new
converts must be rooted and grounded solidly on the
Word of God, so they can stand against the wiles of the
devil.
    Also, we can see the principle in Matthew 12:43-45
at work in the life of a person who has been delivered
from sickness or disease. The Bible calls sickness and
disease satanic oppression (Acts 10:38). Many times the
devil tries to put the same sickness or disease right
back on someone who was healed: "Then goeth he, and
taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than
himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the
LAST STATE of that man IS WORSE THAN THE
FIRST..." (Matt. 12:45).
   Of course, not every case of sickness and disease is
caused by the direct presence of an evil spirit. But
sometimes sickness or disease is the result of the
presence of an evil spirit that is enforcing the affliction.
     That's why it is not enough just to cast an evil spirit
out of a person who is afflicted with sickness or disease
if it is the direct result of the presence of an evil spirit
that is enforcing the condition. The person must be
taught the Word so he can stand against the devil for
himself, because Satan will always try to return with
the same sickness, disease, condition, or sin.
   So the believer must be taught not only how to get

                            141
                 The Triumphant Church


free by the Word of God, he must be taught how to stay
free by appropriating the Word for himself. The Word of
God is our protection against the wiles and strategies of
the devil.
   That is why it is so important in dealing with
demonic influences in the lives of Christians, to be
especially careful to get the Word into them. Christians
need to know who they are in Christ and the authority
they possess in that Name (John 14:13,14; Phil. 2:9,10).
Otherwise, we do them an injustice in casting a spirit
out of their bodies or minds, because the Bible says they
can end up seven times worse than they were before.
   Believers simply need to take their place of
authority in Christ. Believers don't need to be
continually on the run from the devil or harassed in
mind or body. The believers' authority in Christ is a
place of victory and triumph far above principalities and
powers!
    As Christians, we are seated in heavenly places in
Christ, and therefore we look down on Satan and his
hosts from a place of triumph, not fear or defeat (Eph.
1:3; 2:5,6). And if we're going to deal biblically with the
kingdom of darkness, we need to always be mindful of
that triumphant position as joint-heirs with Christ. It is
a position of authority in Christ over the devil and all
his works and operations against us.




                           142
                Chapter 5
      5   Can a Christian Have a
                 Demon?
    Can a Christian have a demon? This is a subject of
great debate in the Christian world. I've heard some
preachers make comments on this subject that made me
cringe inside because what they were saying wasn't
scriptural. They leave the impression that all
Christians have demons in them that routinely need to
be cast out. That statement is wrong for many reasons.
    First, a Christian can't have a demon in his spirit.
That's impossible. A mature believer would have to
deny Christ willfully and with deliberate forethought
before he could ever allow a demon to gain access into
his spirit, because if he's a Christian, the Holy Spirit,
not a demon, indwells his spirit. If a mature believer
did deny Christ, he would cease to be a Christian, for
the word "Christian" means Christ-like. It means that
the life and nature of God dwells in one's spirit (2 Cor.
5:17).
    The reason it's impossible for a Christian to have an
evil spirit in his spirit is that a Christian's spirit has
been recreated by the Holy Spirit (2 Cor. 5:17).
Therefore, a Christian's spirit becomes the dwelling
place of the Holy Spirit (John 14:23; 1 Cor. 6:17) and
cannot also be the dwelling place of an evil spirit (2 Cor.
6:14-16; James 3:11,12).
   Those who say that a Christian can "have" a demon
don't define their terms properly; they don't divide man


                           143
                 The Triumphant Church


correctly. They don't recognize that man is a spirit; he
has a soul; and he lives in a body. And they don't make
it clear that a demon can be affecting a person's soul or
body, but not be in his spirit.
   If people mean a believer can be oppressed or
obsessed in body or soul by a demon, that's one thing.
Yes, a Christian can be oppressed or obsessed in body or
soul by a demon. But it's quite another thing to say that
a Christian can be possessed spirit, soul, and body by a
demon.
    Also, all Christians don't "have" demons even in the
sense that they're all oppressed or obsessed with
demons either. That is an extreme teaching and should
be avoided. Extreme teachings in any area aren't
biblical.
    Actually, not one single person who had a demon
cast out of him in the four Gospels was a Christian.
They couldn't have been Christians, that is, born again
by the blood of Jesus, because Jesus hadn't yet died and
shed His blood for mankind.
    Many people were Jesus' followers or disciples until
the new birth became available after His death, burial,
and resurrection. They had a promissory note on their
salvation until the new birth became available to them.
But in the Gospels, those who did have evil spirits cast
out of them were not yet born again—they weren't
Christians.
    To get a biblical balance on demons in the lives of
believers, study the Gospels to find out what Jesus
instructed the disciples about casting out demons. Did
Jesus ever cast demons out of His twelve disciples? No,
He didn't. Did Jesus teach His disciples to cast demons
out of each other? No, He didn't. Before Jesus ascended,
did He give His disciples a formula for casting demons

                          144
             Can a Christian Have a Demon?


out of other believers? No, He did not!
   Even in the Acts of the Apostles, those out of whom
the devil was cast were not Christians. In fact, there is
no record anywhere in the Bible of an evil spirit being
cast out of a Christian or of a Christian being demon
possessed.
    That doesn't mean a Christian couldn't have an evil
spirit oppressing him or obsessing him, which I've
already talked about. The Bible even says sickness and
disease is the result of satanic oppression (Acts 10:38).
For example, sometimes in dealing with sickness in a
person, I've found that I have to deal with demons
which are afflicting and oppressing the person's body.
    Sometimes, but not always, there is a literal
presence of an evil spirit in the body enforcing the
sickness or disease. And it must be dealt with by the
power of the Holy Spirit in order to get the person
healed. When the demon is cast out, the person is well.
    On the other hand, there have been other people
who were sick but didn't need a devil cast out of them;
they only needed healing. So we can't make ironclad
rules in this area. We have to rely on the Holy Spirit's
leading to know whether or not sickness or disease is
caused by the actual presence of an evil spirit.
   A Christian, just as an unsaved person, can have
anything he wants to have because all people—saved
and unsaved—have free will. We don't lose our free will
when we're born again. If we did, we would be robots,
but God didn't create us to be robots.
    Even after a person is filled with the Holy Spirit, he
still makes his own choices. He can think the devil's
thoughts and yield to the devil's suggestions if he wants
to. The devil always works through the mind, will, and


                           145
                 The Triumphant Church


emotions of man to try to get him to do wrong so he can
gain access to him. However, a Christian doesn't have to
yield to evil spirits or to the flesh. He should learn how
to yield to the Holy Spirit.
    I am dubious of teachings and practices I don't see
demonstrated in the Bible. And when some ministers
teach that all Christians have devils in them that need
to be cast out over and over again—that's not biblical.
You won't find that extreme teaching or practice
anywhere in the Bible. Stay scripturally based and stay
away from extremes and excesses.
    Anyone—saved and unsaved alike—can listen to the
devil and yield to his suggestions. But there is a vast
difference between temporarily turning and yielding to
evil spirits and being oppressed by demons that are
working from the outside or even inside the mind and
body. There's also a vast difference from being obsessed
and being possessed by evil spirits.
    In more than fifty-eight years of ministry, I have
never cast one devil out of a Christian's spirit, and no
one else has either because evil spirits can't be in a
believer's spirit. If evil spirits are present in the
believer, they are either in the body or soul—the mind,
will, or emotions. In most cases, believers haven't
renewed their mind so the devil takes advantage of
them in their souls and bodies. But most believers
aren't having trouble with demons anyway; they're just
having trouble with their flesh.
    Actually, very few unsaved people in this country
are even demon possessed, although there is higher
incidence of it now with the rise in occult practices. In
my years of ministry, I have only seen one person who
was fully demon possessed—spirit, soul, and body.



                           146
             Can a Christian Have a Demon?


       The 1952 Vision: Enveloped in a
               Cloud of Glory
    When Jesus appeared to me in the 1952 vision, He
talked to me extensively on the subject of demons and
how they get ahold of people. There were three parts to
the 1952 vision in which Jesus taught me how demons
try to gain access to people.
   I was holding a meeting in a church in 1952. I was
staying at the parsonage, and after the meetings the
pastor and I would fellowship together.
   After one of the evening meetings, the pastor and I
began to pray. I no more expected anything unusual to
happen at that moment than I expected to be the first
man to land on the moon! I never felt so ordinary in all
my life. But as soon as I knelt down to pray, it just
seemed like a white cloud came down and enveloped
me, and I found myself kneeling in a cloud of glory. I
couldn't see a thing; my physical senses were
suspended. My eyes were wide open, but I couldn't see
the stove, the table, or anything else in the kitchen.
    Many times in the Old Testament the glory of God
manifested in a cloud. (See Exod. 40:34,35; 1 Kings
8:10,11; 2 Chron. 5:13,14.) That's scriptural. I looked up
to where the ceiling should have been, and I saw Jesus
standing there. As I was caught up in that cloud of
glory, Jesus spent an hour and a half talking to me.
    He began His conversation with me by saying, "I'm
going to teach you concerning the devil, demons, and
demon possession. For from this night forward, what is
known in My Word as discerning of spirits will operate
in your life when you are in the Spirit."
   Jesus said, "I'll show you exactly how demons and


                           147
                     The Triumphant Church


evil spirits get ahold of people and dominate them and
possess them, even Christians, if Christians let them."
Jesus talked to me for some time about the gift of
discerning of spirits. One of the things He said to me
was that discerning of spirits is supernatural insight
into the realm of spirits. 1
    Then still enveloped in that cloud of glory, Jesus
opened the realm of the spirit to me, and I began seeing
into that realm. I saw a woman, and Jesus began to
narrate the following scene to me. I saw this scene all in
action as it unfolded. Jesus said to me, "For instance,
this woman was a child of Mine. She was in the
ministry with her husband, and she had a beautiful
singing voice."
    In the vision, I recognized the woman; I knew who
she was. I did not know her personally. I knew she had
left her husband, who was a pastor, for another man,
(In fact, her former husband was this very pastor I was
praying with in that parsonage kitchen.)
   You see, unless Jesus shows us, we only see the
result of things that happen; we don't know why they
happen. I knew this woman had left her husband, but I
didn't know any of the details. We see situations that
happen in the natural, but we don't usually know what
has occurred spiritually in the spirit realm to cause
them to happen.
    The Lord said to me, "This woman was My servant.
Her husband was a pastor, and she was in the ministry
with him. The devil came to her," and as Jesus
narrated, I saw what looked like a little imp—it almost
looked like a little monkey. I saw it come and sit on this
woman's shoulder and begin to whisper in her ear.

1 For more information on this subject, see Rev. Hagin's study guide, The
  Holy Spirit and His Gifts.


                                  148
             Can a Christian Have a Demon?


    The Lord continued speaking to me. He said, "This
evil spirit whispered to this woman, 'You are a beautiful
woman, and you have been robbed in life. You are being
cheated. In the world you could have fame, fortune, and
popularity.'"
    There's no doubt in my mind that with this woman's
singing ability, she could have been an outstanding
singer. But here's something I want you to see.
Although the devil's statement had some truth to it, "In
the world you could have fame, fortune, and
popularity," according to Philippians 4:8, it wasn't in
line with the Word of God.
   PHILIPPIANS 4:8
   8 Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are
   TRUE, whatsoever things are HONEST,
   whatsoever things are JUST, whatsoever things
   are PURE, whatsoever things are LOVELY,
   whatsoever things are of GOOD REPORT; if
   there be any VIRTUE, and if there be any
   PRAISE, THINK ON THESE THINGS.

    What the demon was saying didn't line up with
Scripture because it wasn't true, honest, just, pure,
lovely, or of a good report. It certainly didn't have any
virtue in it. Therefore, it wasn't scripturally sound.
    Some people wonder how to distinguish the voice of
Satan; this is how you do it. What you hear must line
up with the Word. The Bible tells us exactly what to
think on: "... think on these things," and the Bible lists
the kind of thoughts we should think on. The Bible is
our standard for our thought life.
   Jesus continued, "This woman knew it was the devil
speaking those thoughts to her, so she said, 'Get behind
me, Satan.'" And I saw that little demon jump down and
run off and leave her.


                           149
                 The Triumphant Church


   Jesus still narrating, said, "By and by this demon
came back to her again, and sat upon her shoulder and
began to whisper in her ear."
    At this point, that evil spirit wasn't on the inside of
her, but it was on the outside oppressing her mind,
trying to gain access to her through her mind. But she
still had authority over it because the Bible says, “...
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world"
(1 John 4:4). She could have resisted the devil because
the Bible says she could (James 4:7). And she didn't
have to give any place in her thoughts to the devil at all
(Eph. 4:27).
   Jesus said, "By and by this demon came back again,
sat upon her shoulder, and said, 'You are a beautiful
woman, but you have been cheated in life. You have
been robbed in life. In the world, you could have had
fame, fortune, and popularity.' But she knew that was
the devil. So she said, 'Get thee behind me, Satan.' And
the demon left her for a season."
    Notice when this woman exercised her rightful
authority over the devil in Jesus' Name, that demon
had to leave her. But after a season he returned again
to tempt her.
   Just because you resisted Satan one time doesn't
mean he won't try to come back again. The Bible doesn't
teach that. Look at the temptation of Jesus. The Bible
says the devil left Jesus "for a season" (Luke 4:1-13).
And in the vision, I saw the devil return to this
Christian woman to tempt her again.
   As Jesus began narrating, I saw that little imp come
again and sit on this woman's shoulder and whisper in
her ear. Jesus said, "By and by, the evil spirit came
again and whispered in her ear, 'You are a beautiful
woman, but you have been cheated in life. In the world

                           150
             Can a Christian Have a Demon?


you could have had fame, fortune, money, and
popularity.'"
    Jesus explained that at this point, this woman was
still just being oppressed by the devil. Any Christian
can be oppressed by an evil spirit. No Christian is
immune to Satan's suggestions and oppression, but we
don't have to yield to his suggestions. And we have
authority over any oppression he tries to bring against
us.
   Then Jesus said, "But this time she began to think
Satan's thoughts after him. She began to think, I am
beautiful, because she liked to think that. And she
began to think, I have been cheated in life."
    This woman didn't keep her thoughts in line with
the Bible; she didn't keep her mind focused on Jesus.
The Bible says, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace,
whose mind is stayed on thee ..." (Isa. 26:3). But instead
of keeping her mind on the Lord, she began to dwell on
and entertain Satan's thoughts.
     She was a beautiful woman, but she got to thinking
about her beauty instead of keeping her thoughts
centered on God, His Word, and on God's will for her
life. When she began thinking the devil's thoughts, she
got lifted up in pride. The Bible says, "Pride goeth
before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall"
(Prov. 16:18).

            Suggestion: Satan's Tool
   Many believers wonder how Satan is able to gain
ground in their lives. The first place Satan starts to
work is in their mind, and one of Satan's greatest and
most powerful weapons is the weapon of suggestion.
After all, that was the weapon Satan used against Eve


                           151
                 The Triumphant Church


in the garden (Gen. 3:1-7). Eve followed Satan's
suggestion, and she was "beguiled" or deceived by him
(Gen. 3:13). One of Satan's main strategies today is still
to beguile people; he tricks and deceives them by his
suggestions.
     But we don't have to fall prey to Satan's suggestions
because the Bible says we are to give the devil no place
in us. That means don't give him any place in your
thought life. If the devil can get a place in your thought
life, he can get a place in you.
    Jesus then told me that when this woman began to
think Satan's thoughts and follow Satan's suggestions,
she became obsessed with that kind of thinking. She
began to like thinking those thoughts. Then in the
vision, the woman changed and she became
transparent, as if her body were made of glass. And I
could see a black dot in her head about as big as a half-
dollar.
    Jesus explained to me, "At first this woman, My
servant, was merely oppressed by this evil spirit from
the outside. She rebuked him because as a child of Mine
she had authority over the devil. She resisted him
several times and he left. But the last time she began to
listen to him and to continue to think his thoughts and
listen to his suggestions, because she liked to think
those thoughts. Then she became obsessed with the
devil's thoughts."
    Jesus said to me, "She became obsessed with that
kind of thinking, but even then it wasn't too late. She
was still My child. She knew what to do. If she had
wanted to put those thoughts out of her mind, she could
have. She could have said, 'I refuse to think like that.
That's of the devil, and I resist you, Satan, in the Name
of Jesus.' But she wanted to think those thoughts, so

                           152
             Can a Christian Have a Demon?


she continued to think like that until she became
obsessed with that thinking."
    It's possible for a believer to become obsessed in his
thinking with the devil's thoughts. But I want you to
understand this: That woman could have rebuked the
devil at any time because she had authority over Satan
in Jesus' Name, even in her thought life.
    Jesus explained, "She knew what she was doing. She
even knew she was obsessed with that kind of thinking.
At any time she could have said, 'These thoughts are of
the devil, and I refuse to think like that. I command
you, Satan, to leave me. Get behind me, in the Name of
Jesus,' and Satan would have obeyed her. But she liked
to think, I'm beautiful. So she continued to think, I
have been cheated. In the world I could have had fame,
fortune, and popularity."
   Jesus explained, "It wasn't until she began listening
to what the devil was saying and to entertain his
thoughts that she began to go wrong.
    "She eventually left her husband and took up with
another man. She went from that man to another man.
Then she went from that man to still another man,
until she'd had five different men and didn't marry any
of them; she just lived with them."
   Jesus said, "It still wasn't too late. If she had
repented and turned back to Me and asked Me, I would
have forgiven her. She didn't need anyone to put the
devil on the run for her. She could have done it herself."
    Jesus doesn't endorse and condone wrongdoing, but,
thank God, He forgives wrongdoing if the believer is
sincerely sorry, asks for forgiveness, and repents and
turns from his sin (1 John 1:9). Also, notice Jesus'
statement, "She didn't need anyone to put the devil on


                           153
                 The Triumphant Church


the run for her. She could have done it herself."
   It's not enough just to have authority in Christ.
Believers need to exercise the authority they have over
the devil before it will do them any good.
   Then in the vision, I saw a leader of a particular
Full Gospel denomination go to a hotel. In the vision I
was standing outside the hotel. I saw the name of the
hotel.
    Then it seemed as if I went right inside the hotel
with this Full Gospel minister. He went up to the desk
to inquire if Mr. and Mrs. So-and-so were registered
there. They were. This woman was registered with a
man as his wife.
    The minister of this denomination went up to the
door of their hotel room, and in the vision, in the Spirit,
I was standing in the hallway. I saw the whole scene as
it was taking place. The minister knocked on the door.
This woman came to the door with almost no clothes on
and opened it. When she opened the door, she
recognized this man, a leader of the Full Gospel
denomination.
    She said, "I know what you came for." The minister
had come to try to restore her and pray with her and
get her back to God and to come back to her husband.
   She said, "But I want to tell you as far as Jesus
Christ is concerned, to hell with Him." And she
slammed the door in the minister's face.
   Jesus said to me, "You see, she doesn't want Me
anymore."
   "Now," Jesus continued, "if she had been overly
tempted and in a fit of temptation or in a rage of
passion and had said, 'I don't want Him,' I would have
overlooked it and forgiven her. But she knew exactly

                           154
             Can a Christian Have a Demon?


what she was doing. She willfully and deliberately said,
'I don't want Him.'"
    And when she said that, I saw that big black dot in
her head, about as big as a half-dollar, go from her head
down inside of her, into her heart and down into her
spirit. Then Jesus said to me, "Now she has become
possessed with that devil. That devil has control of her
now, but only by her permission."

          Oppression, Obsession, and
                 Possession
    You see, there's a vast difference between
oppression, obsession, and possession. This woman had
been in the ministry with her husband for about twenty
years; she was not a baby Christian. She was oppressed
and obsessed at first, but when she deliberately and
willfully denied Christ as a mature Christian, she
became possessed with that demon. But it was only by
her permission that she became demon possessed. And
the moment she denied Christ, she could no longer be
called a Christian.
   I said to Jesus, "Lord, why are You showing me this?
Do You want me to cast that devil out of her?"
    He answered, "No, you can't cast the devil out of
her. No one can cast it out because she doesn't want it
to go; she wants it. No man—not you, the church elders,
other believers, nor anyone else—can exercise authority
over the human spirit. When I was on the earth, I
exercised authority over evil spirits, but not over
human spirits. Even God the Father does not exercise
authority over the human spirit.
   "I did exercise authority over evil spirits and
demons," Jesus said. "And believers in the Church can


                          155
                 The Triumphant Church


exercise authority over evil spirits and demons. But if
any human spirit wants the condition to remain as it is,
then there is nothing you can do about it; it will stay
that way. If this woman wants to have this devil, that's
the way it will be, and you can't cast that evil spirit out
of her.
    "My Word says, '... whosoever WILL, let him take the
water of life freely,' and '... CHOOSE you this day whom
ye will serve ...' [Rev. 22:17; Josh. 24:15]. Man has free
will to make whatever choice he will on the earth. God
will not override man's will."
    Jesus explained to me that before this woman
denied Christ, if she had wanted to be free, I could have
cast those spirits out of her body or soul in His Name.
But she could have also dealt with the devil at any time
and rebuked him. But because she didn't want to be
free, there was nothing anyone could do to help her.
    Of course, after she denied Christ as a mature
Christian, it was no longer possible to cast that evil
spirit out of her. She had made the choice which master
she would choose, and she chose the devil (Rom. 6:16).
God Himself doesn't exercise authority over people's
wills. If people want to think Satan's thoughts and yield
to him, God won't override their will, and you won't be
able to either.
    You can't make people think in line with God's
Word, and you can't make people want what God has for
them. You can't make them want more of the Holy
Spirit rather than evil spirits. You can teach people
what the Word says, and you can encourage them to
believe God's Word and walk in line with it, but you
can't make people do anything.

       The Unpardonable Sin—The Sin

                           156
              Can a Christian Have a Demon?


                     Unto Death
    When I asked Jesus, "Do You want me to pray for
this woman?" He replied, "No, don't even pray for her."
Now that came as a real jolt to me! Did you ever hear of
not praying for people? I'm a stickler for the Word. If
someone tells me something, I don't care who it is, I
want to see it in the Word. I said to Jesus, "Why, Lord?
I've never heard anything like that. Is that scriptural?"
    He answered, "Didn't you ever read in My Word, 'If
any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto
death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them
that sin not unto death. THERE IS A SIN UNTO
DEATH: I DO NOT SAY THAT HE SHALL PRAY FOR
IT'?" (1 John 5:16).
   Jesus said, "There is a sin unto death and the Word
says not to pray for those who commit it."
   There's no way you could know whether a person
has sinned the sin unto death or not unless God showed
you by divine revelation. Three different times in my
ministry the Lord has told me not to pray for a certain
person because he or she had committed the sin unto
death. This woman was the first person.
    Jesus told me I was not to pray for this woman
because she had committed the unpardonable sin—the
sin unto death. I told the Lord I still wasn't satisfied. I
said, "I won't accept any kind of vision or experience,
even though I'm seeing You, Jesus, if what You say
can't be proven by the New Testament. I won't accept a
word of what You are saying to me unless You can give
me another scripture to substantiate that I'm not to
pray for this woman."
  I reminded Him what His Word says, " . . . in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be

                           157
                 The Triumphant Church


established" (Matt. 18:16). He gave me the following
scriptures and began discussing them with me.
   HEBREWS 6:4-6
   4 For it is impossible for those who were once
   ENLIGHTENED, and have TASTED OF THE
   HEAVENLY        GIFT,     and    were   MADE
   PARTAKERS OF THE HOLY GHOST,
   5 And have TASTED THE GOOD WORD OF
   GOD, and THE POWERS OF THE WORLD TO
   COME,
   6 IF THEY SHALL FALL AWAY, to renew them
   again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to
   themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him
   to an open shame.

   Jesus explained to me that before a Christian could
be guilty of committing the sin unto death, all five
conditions mentioned in this scripture would have to
apply to the person.
    First, it says, "For it is impossible for those who
were once enlightened ..." (Heb. 6:4). Jesus said this
referred to what many of us in those days called
"getting under conviction." The preaching of the Word
enlightens the sinner. It's like the prodigal son when he
"came to himself" (Luke 15:17). Through the preaching
of God's Word, the sinner sees that he is lost. He's
enlightened about the truth of God's Word and he sees
his need for a Savior.
   Second, Hebrews 6:4 says, "... and have tasted of the
heavenly gift...." Jesus said a man under conviction has
not yet tasted of the Heavenly Gift, because Jesus is the
Heavenly Gift.
   Jesus quoted John 3:16: "For God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have


                          158
              Can a Christian Have a Demon?


everlasting life." So "tasting of the Heavenly Gift" refers
to salvation—receiving Jesus Christ as his Savior.
    Then, third, "... and were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost" (Heb. 6:4). Jesus told me that means more than
being born again and becoming acquainted with the
Holy Spirit through His indwelling Presence (John
14:16,17). It refers to being filled with the Holy Spirit—
having received the baptism in the Holy Spirit (Acts 1:5;
2:4).
     Then, fourth, "And have tasted the good word of God
..." (Heb. 6:5). Jesus said this can't apply to baby
Christians. They haven't tasted the good Word of God.
Baby Christians are still on the "sincere milk of the
Word." First Peter 2:2 tells us: "As newborn babes,
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby."
   Another translation calls it "the solid meat of God's
word." In other words, babes in Christ couldn't qualify
for committing the unpardonable sin because they
haven't tasted the solid meat of God's Word. They're
only on the milk of the Word.
   Only those who have had some degree of spiritual
growth and who fully understand the seriousness of
denying Christ and are experienced in the solid meat of
the Word could be guilty of committing this sin.
    Jesus pointed out the similarity between spiritual
and physical growth. He said baby Christians can't be
guilty of committing the unpardonable sin because they
wouldn't be mature enough to know what they are
doing.
    The fifth condition for committing the unpardonable
sin is that a person has “... tasted ... the powers of the
world to come" (Heb. 6:5). Jesus explained to me what


                           159
                 The Triumphant Church


this meant. He said that "the power of the world to
come" are spiritual gifts.
    Jesus explained, "Those who have tasted of the
powers of the world to come are mature Christians who
have the gifts of the Spirit operating in their lives or
ministries." He explained that the baptism of the Holy
Spirit with the ensuing gifts is the earnest of our
inheritance in the world to come (Eph. 1:13,14; 2 Cor.
5:5).
   So there are five Bible qualifications a believer
would have to meet before he or she could be guilty of
committing the unpardonable sin. You can readily see
that very few believers could qualify to be guilty of
committing this sin.
    Jesus said this woman in the vision who denied Him
did qualify to be able to commit the unpardonable sin,
and He explained why. He said this woman had been
enlightened; she knew her need for a Savior. She had
tasted of the Heavenly Gift because she was born again.
Jesus Christ had been her Savior for many years.
    This woman had also been filled with the Holy
Spirit and had been in the ministry for many years with
her husband. She knew the Word of God. She had
experienced enough spiritual growth so that she wasn't
a spiritual baby anymore on the milk of the Word. She
had tasted of the solid meat of God's Word. She had the
gifts of the Spirit operating in her life. Therefore, this
woman met every scriptural condition as one who could
commit the unpardonable sin.
    Jesus told me He would have forgiven her if she had
just been tempted and overcome by the devil. He told
me that she didn't commit the sin unto death because
she went off with another man. He explained if she'd
had a hundred men, but had turned back to Him and

                           160
             Can a Christian Have a Demon?


repented, He would have forgiven her. But Jesus told
me that she came to the decision without being tempted
or overcome, where she willfully and deliberately said
she didn't want Jesus anymore. That is the sin unto
death—the unpardonable sin.
    It's what the mature Christian does about Jesus
that determines whether or not he commits the sin unto
death. If the mature Christian willfully denies Christ
with deliberate forethought, the Bible calls that
committing the unpardonable sin, which is the sin unto
death. The sin unto death leads to spiritual death—
eternal separation from God.
    Stop and think about it. A person gets saved by
receiving Jesus Christ into his heart. The only way
people can lose their salvation is by what they do about
Jesus. Jesus is the central issue of salvation. That's why
when people ask, "Can a Christian have a demon?" they
need to define what they mean by that. Actually, as I
said, Christians can have anything they want to have
because they have free will.
    If they keep on yielding to the devil, mature
Christians could finally get to the point where they
choose to deny Christ, as this woman did. But then they
would no longer be Christians because they would no
longer be "Christ-like" and endeavoring to follow Jesus.
Once the Spirit of Christ departs, a person couldn't be
called a Christian anymore. And only at that point can
they become possessed.
   So just because this woman was a Christian at one
time, she didn't continue as a Christian. She ceased
being Christ-like when she followed the devil and
denied the Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus said, " . . . If YE
CONTINUE IN MY WORD, then are ye my disciples
indeed" (John 8:31). This woman didn't continue in

                           161
                 The Triumphant Church


God's Word; she wanted nothing more to do with Jesus.
    Let me say something else here. Just because people
claim to be Christians, is no sign they are born again. If
there's no evidence of the fruit of the born-again,
recreated spirit in their lives, I would seriously wonder
about their salvation experience. You can put all the
labels you want on people, but that doesn't make it so.
    For example, a woman once told me that her
husband claimed to be a Christian but that he was
involved in all kinds of devilment. He didn't show any
evidence of being a new creature in Christ. She wanted
to know if he could really be a Christian.
   I said, "No, he is not a Christian. The word
Christian means Christ-like. Is he acting as Christ
would act? No, he certainly isn't. Is he following Christ
or walking in the light of the Word in any way? No, he's
not. He's following after the devil, so don't call him a
Christian."
   Then in the vision, Jesus gave me Hebrews 10, and
He explained more about the sin unto death.
   HEBREWS 10:26-29
   26 For IF WE SIN WILFULLY after that we have
   received the knowledge of the truth, there
   remaineth no more sacrifice for sins,
   27 But a certain fearful looking for of judgment
   and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
   adversaries.
   28 He that despised Moses' law died without
   mercy under two or three witnesses:
   29 Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye,
   shall he be thought worthy, who hath
   TRODDEN UNDER FOOT THE SON OF GOD,
   and hath COUNTED THE BLOOD OF THE
   COVENANT, wherewith he was sanctified, AN


                           162
              Can a Christian Have a Demon?

   UNHOLY THING, and hath done despite unto
   the Spirit of grace?

    Verse 26 says, "For if we sin wilfully after that we
have received the knowledge of the truth...." That sin
couldn't just be referring to any sin, for if it just
referred to any sin, then First John 1:9 wouldn't be
true. First John 1:9 promises us that if we confess our
sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us and to cleanse
us of all unrighteousness.
    Therefore, Hebrews 10:26 is talking about the sin of
rejecting Christ. Paul (who I believe was the author of
the Book of Hebrews) was originally writing to Hebrew
Christians in this passage. There's a principle in these
verses for all Christians, of course. But in New
Testament days, the Jewish Christians were tempted to
go back into Judaism because of the difficulties of
following Christ.
    When these Hebrews became Christians, they were
ostracized and cut off from their families. They stuck
together and helped one another, but they were having
it rough, not only financially, but also because of great
persecution.
    Some of them were tempted to go back to their old
life of Judaism, but to do that they would have had to
deny that Christ is the Son of God. Hebrews 10:29 says
the unpardonable sin is "trodding under foot the Son of
God."
   In other words, if those Jewish Christians had gone
back to Judaism, they would have had to deny that
Christ is the Messiah. If they had done that, they would
have had to deny that Jesus was born of a virgin. And if
they had gone back into Judaism, that means they
would have counted the blood of the covenant
wherewith Jesus was sanctified as an unholy thing

                           163
                 The Triumphant Church


(Heb. 10:29). If Jesus isn't the Son of God, and He's not
the Messiah, then His blood would just be like the blood
of any other human being—it would not be holy.
    To deny that Christ is the Son of God is the sin
Hebrews 10 is referring to. It's the same as turning
away from Him, rejecting Him, saying, "I don't want
Jesus anymore." The Bible is saying that if mature
believers willfully and deliberately deny Christ, there
isn't any more sacrifice for their sins.
   After all, what made you a new creature to begin
with? It was receiving Jesus Christ as your Savior. It
was believing in your heart that God raised Jesus from
the dead, and that He is the Son of God. You obeyed the
Bible and believed in your heart and confessed with
your mouth Jesus Christ as your Lord and Savior (Rom.
10:9,10).
    Therefore, the sin the Bible is addressing here is
denying Christ, not some other sin a Christian may
commit in his lifetime. But one of the areas where
Satan has wreaked great havoc in the Body of Christ is
in this area of the unpardonable sin. Many mental
institutions today are filled with people, even believers,
who are convinced by Satan that they have committed
the unpardonable sin.
    Satan has used this scripture in Hebrews against
people who are not knowledgeable of the whole counsel
of God. He has taken advantage of their ignorance and
lied to them and held them in bondage by telling them
that they have sinned "willfully," thereby committing
the unpardonable sin.
    Throughout the centuries people have died at the
stake because they wouldn't recant their belief in Jesus.
If they had recanted under great duress, God wouldn't
hold that against them. But if they recanted willingly,

                           164
              Can a Christian Have a Demon?


of course, that would be different.
    Jesus said this woman in the vision also committed
the unpardonable sin on the basis of this passage here
in Hebrews 10:26-29. As a mature Christian,
understanding fully what she was doing, she willfully
trod Jesus Christ underfoot and counted His blood an
unholy thing (v. 29). Therefore, there was no more
sacrifice for her sin.
    The devil tries to make believers think they've
committed the unpardonable sin. Over the years, I've
had people talk to me who thought they committed this
sin unto death.
    I've asked them, "Have you trampled underfoot the
blood of Jesus and said that He was just a man—not the
Son of God? Have you said Jesus was not virgin-born?
Have you said that His blood isn't holy and that it's the
same as the blood of any other man? Have you
completely rejected Jesus?"
   To every one of those questions they've all replied,
"No, of course not."
   "That verse doesn't apply to you then," I've
answered.
    People need to understand biblically about the
unpardonable sin so the devil can't take advantage of
them. Unless a mature Christian who meets all five
qualifications in Hebrews 6 willfully says, "Jesus is not
the Son of God," or "I don't want Jesus," he has not
committed this sin. Baby Christians can't commit that
sin by making that statement in a fit of temper or rage
or in a fit of passion. In this verse the Bible is referring
to a willful, conscious decision.
   No matter what Christians have done, or how far
away they've wandered from God, even if they have said

                            165
                 The Triumphant Church


some things against Jesus in a moment of anger, He
won't hold that against them if they repent and confess
their sin to Him and turn away from wrongdoing.
That's not to condone sin because sin is wrong. But
there's a provision for believers when they sin and miss
it (1 John 1:9).
   That's why if you get out of fellowship with God, you
need to get right back in fellowship as fast as you can.
You get out on the devil's territory, and it's dangerous
because the devil is out to destroy your life (John 10:10).
    Actually, the sin of rejecting Jesus can happen in
two ways: People can hear the gospel preached and
reject Jesus and just keep on rejecting Him. After a
while the Holy Spirit won't deal with them anymore
about receiving Jesus as their Savior (Gen. 6:3), and
those people will spend eternity in hell when they die.
The other way people can reject Jesus is if mature
believers willfully and deliberately reject Him.
   I asked the Lord what would happen to this woman.
He said she would spend eternity in the lake of fire and
brimstone. In that vision I saw her go down into that
place, and I heard her terrible screams.
    I knew another person who committed the
unpardonable sin. The Holy Spirit dealt with him over a
long period of time, but he just kept rejecting the Holy
Spirit's dealings. He never would yield to God. I
personally talked to him more than once about God. He
told me himself that he'd been born again and that God
had called him to preach, but he wasn't willing to
preach.
   Finally, he just went away from the Lord and quit
going to church and got off into sin. I talked to him
about the Lord and tried to get him back to God. At the
time, he was living in deep sin, doing just about

                           166
              Can a Christian Have a Demon?


anything you could mention. When I'd talk to him about
the Lord, he'd just weep and shake and tremble under
conviction. I kept praying for him and talking to him on
different occasions over a fifteen-year period, trying to
get him back to the Lord.
    The last time I talked to this man, he said, "I know
everything you're saying is true, all right. But I'm not
going to do anything about it." Then he added, "But
don't give up on me. Keep on praying for me." So I kept
praying for him. I remember one particular night, I was
on my knees praying for him in the nighttime, and the
Lord spoke to me. He said, "Get up from there!" It was
so real, it startled me. So I got up. The Lord said, "Don't
pray for him."
    "But, Lord," I said, "he told me that he knew You
when he was a teenager. He said You called him to
preach. That's why I'm praying that he will get back
into fellowship with You and return to You like the
prodigal son of old." The Lord answered, "No, don't pray
for him anymore."
    "You're telling me not to pray for him anymore?" I
asked. "But he's still here in this life. There's still hope
for him."
   "No," the Lord said, "he'll never be saved. He will die
and go to hell." That came as a shock to me! I said,
"Lord, I don't understand that."
    Jesus said to me, "Did you ever read in the Old
Testament about Ephraim? Don't you know I finally
said, 'Leave Ephraim alone. Just don't bother him
anymore. Leave him alone.' Why did I say that?
Because Ephraim was joined to his idols [Hosea 4:17].
So you leave this man alone."
   You see, in a spiritual sense, this man was joined


                            167
                 The Triumphant Church


fast to his idols. He had opened wide the door to the
devil, and the Lord knew he would never repent. I never
did pray for him after that. I just couldn't. Others did,
but the Lord told me not to and the man died at an
early age. He was about fifty-four years old when he
died.
    I inquired of his relatives how he died. They said he
died cursing God, yet at one time, he was a believer.
Isn't that terrible! But that can happen when you open
a door to the devil and persist in sin and never turn
from it and repent.
   Was that God's will? Of course not! But, you see, it's
dangerous to be in Satan's territory. The devil can
mislead people, and it's possible that they can come to
the place where they willfully and deliberately don't
want anything to do with God.
    It's dangerous to listen to the lies of the devil and
get out of fellowship with God and get into sin. And it is
possible for believers, if they are over in Satan's
territory, to just coldly and deliberately not want
anything more to do with God.
    But you need to realize that there is a vast
difference between believers who desire to walk with
God, but occasionally stumble and fall, yet don't intend
to, and those believers who just willfully and
deliberately persist in wrongdoing and intentionally
turn away from God and deny Him.

              The Last Opportunity
    I was holding meetings in west Texas in 1945. One
of the board members said to me, "Brother Hagin, I
want to ask you a question." He went on to explain that
a previous pastor had originally built that church and


                           168
              Can a Christian Have a Demon?


had pastored it for about thirty years in this town of
about 15,000 people. But he had left his wife and had
taken up with another woman in that small town. He
just lived with her; he ever did marry her.
    By the time I came to preach at this church, several
years had passed since this pastor had run off with this
other woman. Every year since that pastor had left the
church, a new pastor came to the church but would only
stay about a year and leave. The church was trying to
live down the bad reputation it had because of that first
pastor who had run off with that woman. He still lived
in the same town with her, and he ran a gambling hall
and did other things that weren't right. He had brought
reproach to that church by the way he was living.
    Anyway, this board member said to me, "Brother
Hagin, about three weeks ago on a Sunday morning,
this former pastor suddenly showed up for the Sunday
morning service. One of the women in the church gave
an utterance in tongues, and this former pastor got up
and interpreted it. Could that be right? Could that have
been God?"
    "Well," I said, "in the first place, have you ever read
in the Old Testament that when Saul was backslidden
and away from God, he got in with some of the prophets
and the Holy Ghost came upon him and he began to
prophesy [see First Samuel chapter 19]. The Bible says
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance
Rom. 11:29. But that doesn't mean God condoned Saul's
sin. So before I can judge whether the interpretation
was of God or not, tell me what the message was."
    The board member said, "Well, we were all so
startled, I don't remember the first part of it, but it
ended with, 'This is your last call. I'm giving you your
last opportunity.'"

                           169
                 The Triumphant Church


   When this incident occurred, it had been about three
years since this former pastor had been in fellowship
with God. The board member said to me, "When that
former pastor finished the interpretation, he shouted
out loud, 'I want everyone to know that as far as Jesus
Christ is concerned, to hell with Him!' and he turned
and walked out of the building."
    The board member said, "When the former pastor
interpreted that message by saying, 'This is your last
call—your last opportunity,' do you think that was the
right interpretation?"
    I said, "Yes, that was God. God was talking to this
man supernaturally. The man was speaking out of his
spirit what the Holy Ghost was saying to him. That
interpretation wasn't a message to that church body;
God was talking just to him. And he got the message.
God in His mercy gave him one last opportunity to
repent and turn from his sin, but the man turned it
down. He rightly interpreted what the Holy Ghost was
saying to him, and he made his decision to reject Christ,
willfully and deliberately."
    That's sad, but it can happen. There's a lesson to be
learned here. Remember, in this vision, the Lord began
His conversation with me by saying, "I'll show you how
the devil gets ahold of people, even believers, if they'll
let him."
    You see, you are on dangerous ground if you begin
listening to what the devil is feeding your mind and
begin thinking his thoughts and following his
suggestions. By thinking wrong thoughts, you can open
a door to the devil. If you open the door to the devil, it
won't be long before he'll try to control your mind, and
you'll become obsessed with his thoughts.
   Believers aren't to give any place to the devil in

                           170
             Can a Christian Have a Demon?


their thought life. The Bible says, "Neither give place to
the devil" (Eph. 4:27). That means that the devil can't
get ahold of believers unless they let him. They can give
him permission, however. But believers don't have to let
Satan dominate their thinking because we have
authority over him in the Name of Jesus. Satan is not
our lord, and we don't have to let him lord it over us
even in our thought life.
    Christians have a will of their own that God never
violates. But Satan cannot violate a person's will either.
Believers don't need to yield to the devil. God has well
equipped and enabled the Body of Christ to be strong in
the Lord by thinking God's thoughts after him. We don't
have to fall prey to the devil and his thoughts because
He is not our Lord, Jesus is. We have victory over
Satan, but we must not only exercise the authority we
have in Christ, we also have to keep the door to our
minds closed on the devil by thinking in line with God's
Word. That's how we give Satan no access to us and
stand strong as members of the triumphant church.




                           171
              Chapter 6
 6   How to Deal With Evil Spirits
   It is dangerous to think the devil's thoughts because
his thoughts bring darkness, depression, oppression,
and finally error. The woman in the 1952 vision didn't
guard her mind, and it caused her to go into error.
Because she rejected Jesus, she will spend eternity
burning in the lake of fire and brimstone (Rev. 20:15).
   I was still kneeling in the kitchen of the parsonage,
praying with that pastor for whom I was holding the
meeting. As I said, this pastor was this woman's former
husband.
    When I asked Jesus why He showed me this vision,
He said, "I wanted to show you first of all how the devil,
demons, or evil spirits get ahold of people, even
believers, if they let them. But, secondly, I want you to
command the demon that's in this woman to stop
harassing, intimidating, and deterring the ministry of
my servant," and the Lord called the name of that
woman's ex-husband, the pastor I was praying with.
    This pastor had never told me anything about his
former wife. I knew his wife had left him several years
before, but I didn't know anything else about the
situation until I had this vision praying in his kitchen.
    Still in the vision, Jesus told me that although I
couldn't deal with the woman myself, for no one, not
even God, has authority over the human spirit because
people have a free will, I did have authority over the
evil spirit that was influencing this woman.


                           173
                 The Triumphant Church


   Jesus told me that I could deal with the evil spirit
that was influencing her, because that demon was
hindering His servant in the work of the ministry. I
found out later that she had been calling her former
husband, this pastor, threatening to come to town to
make trouble for him.
    As a member of the Body of Christ, I had authority
over the devil that was hindering and coming against
the Lord's servant, this pastor. But that didn't mean
this woman would be delivered of this evil spirit
because she didn't want to be delivered. She wanted
that demon; she didn't want to give it up. Besides, she
had already committed the unpardonable sin by
denying Christ. But by dealing with the evil spirit that
was influencing her, the demon could no longer harass
and intimidate God's servant, this pastor.
    I asked Jesus, "Lord, how do I deal with the evil
spirit in this woman?"
    The Lord answered, "You just simply say, You foul
spirit that is operating and manifesting yourself in the
life of ______________ (and Jesus called the woman's
name), intimidating, harassing, and deterring the
ministry of ___________, (and Jesus called the pastor's
name), I command you to stop in your operations
against him. I command you to cease and desist in your
maneuvers, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ.'"
   I said, "Is that all I have to do?"
    I thought perhaps I would have to prepare myself
and get ready or some big battle or something.
Sometimes because of our religious teaching, we think
we have to pray for a week before we can exercise our
authority over the devil. Or we think maybe we ought o
fast several meals before we could attempt to deal with
the devil.

                            174
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


   But our authority over the devil is in Jesus' Name
based on our rights and privileges in Christ. Our
authority over the devil doesn't depend on how long we
pray and fast, but we do need to know who we are in
Christ. On the other hand, praying and fasting will help
make us more sensitive to the leading of the Holy
Spirit.
    Jesus replied, "That's all you do." "Yes, but, Lord,
she's in another state and I'm here," I protested. The
Lord replied, "There's no distance in the spirit realm.
You can command a devil to stop harassing,
intimidating, or deterring someone who is in another
state, and he'll have to stop in his operations against
the person."
    So I dealt with the evil spirit that was working
through that woman just as Jesus told me to do. And
when I spoke to the demon, he answered me. Jesus had
told me I would begin to see and hear in the realm of the
spirit; that was the gift of discerning of spirits in
operation. The pastor didn't see or hear anything, but I
both saw and heard that spirit as it spoke to me.
    The evil spirit said he sure didn't want to stop in his
operations against that pastor, but he knew he had to if
I told him to. I told him he had to in Jesus' Name. Then
still in the spirit realm, I saw the evil spirit run away
like a whipped dog. When he did, I started laughing.
There is a laugh in the Spirit, and it indicates a note of
victory.
   Then I became tuned back in to the natural realm,
and I realized that the pastor was laughing with me. I
don't know how long we laughed like that in the Spirit.
After it was over, I told him I'd been in the spirit realm
—lost in that cloud of glory—but that I thought I'd
heard him laughing too. He said he had been. He told

                           175
                 The Triumphant Church


me he didn't see or hear anything, but he knew I both
saw and heard something.
    I asked him what he'd been laughing about. He said
he'd gotten a phone call and a letter that day from his
former wife saying she was going to come to town to
make trouble for him and his ministry. When we were
praying, the pastor had sensed in his spirit that the
devil who was operating through her had been dealt
with. By faith the pastor could see that devil on the run.
I told him I'd actually seen the spirit that was involved,
and that I'd seen it run away like a whipped dog. That
was what we were both laughing about, so we were both
in the Spirit.

     Check Up on Spiritual Revelations
               and Visions
    I like to check up both scripturally and naturally on
the validity of spiritual revelations and visions I
receive. In other words, I don't accept revelations and
visions just because they occur. I described to this
pastor in detail what I'd seen in the vision. I told him
about the minister (the head of that woman's
denomination) going to a certain hotel where this
pastor's ex-wife was staying with another man. I
related to the pastor what his ex-wife had said to the
minister.
    The pastor exclaimed, "That's exactly what
happened! The man you saw in the vision is the district
superintendent of the denomination we belonged to.
And that's exactly what he told me that she said and
did."
   I had no knowledge of any of that in the natural;
there was no way I could have known that except by the


                           176
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


Spirit of the Lord. But I like to be sure about things I
see in the Spirit and check up on them. I don't just
accept everything that happens in the Spirit and run off
with it and accept it or try to build a doctrine on it.
    This pastor, this woman's former husband, had
since remarried. I didn't know his first wife had been
threatening to cause trouble for him. Of course the devil
in this woman wanted to cause trouble for him in his
church and in the community to deter him from the
work of the ministry. That's what the Lord meant when
He said an evil spirit operating through this woman
was harassing and intimidating His servant.
    When this pastor had eventually remarried, his
denomination wouldn't have anything more to do with
him because he was divorced. But when the Lord spoke
to me in the vision, He called this pastor "My servant."
Isn't it strange that the Christians in that
denomination wouldn't even call him brother!

              Harassing the Church
    In the vision, Jesus explained to me that a person
doesn't have to operate in the gift of discerning of
spirits in order to deal with the evil when the devil is
harassing, intimidating, or deterring a member of the
Body of Christ. We have authority in those situations to
command the devil to stop in his maneuvers against a
believer.
   It doesn't take a gift of the Spirit in those situations
in order to take your stand and to exercise your
authority over the devil. Jesus also said a believer
doesn't need a word of knowledge or to be a minister in
order to exercise authority over the devil. Every believer
has the authority to use the Name of Jesus and to take


                           177
                  The Triumphant Church


his stand against the devil (Matt. 18:18; Mark 16:17;
Luke 10:19; Phil. 2:9,10).
    Jesus explained, "Anytime anyone in the Church or
outside the church is doing anything, saying anything,
or acting in any way that embarrasses, hinders,
harasses, intimidates, deters, or retards the ministry of
the Church, you don't have to have discerning of spirits
or a word of knowledge, just know it is the devil causing
the trouble.
    "You are just to command the spirit that's behind
the operation against the believer to stop and desist in
his maneuvers in My Name—in the Name of Jesus. You
don't have to deal with the person; deal with the evil
spirit behind the operation."
    You see, many people—believers and unbelievers
alike—unconsciously yield to the devil. Sometimes due
to ignorance, people can innocently become a tool of
Satan when they unconsciously yield to him. But
people, even believers, can also consciously yield to the
devil too.
    Although believers have the authority to deal with
any evil spirit that's influencing a person to harass the
Body of Christ, we don't have the authority to deal with
the person causing the problem. Our authority doesn't
extend that far because we don't have authority over
the human will, and the person may want the evil
spirit. No one can get a person delivered if he wants to
keep an evil spirit.
    That's why binding the evil spirit behind the
operation will not get the person causing the problem
delivered of evil spirits, for he has free choice and he
may want to keep them. But exercising our authority
stops the evil spirits in their strategy against a believer.


                            178
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


    Problems occur in this area when believers try to
deal with people in the natural realm, instead of with
evil spirits influencing people in the spiritual realm.
Many times we try to deal with people when we should
be dealing with evil spirits, and we get things in a mess.
    Now don't misunderstand me. There's a time and a
place to deal with people in the natural. But Jesus was
talking about those cases where the enemy is working
through people to hinder the Church—the Body of
Christ. If a person hinders, harasses, or deters the
Church, then it is the working of evil spirits through
the person.
    In dealing in the lives of people to get them
delivered of a demon, it's a different situation. In most
cases, their own will is involved. What do they want to
do about the situation? Do they want to be delivered?
Some people want the situation as it is; they don't want
to be free from demons. And in that case, there's
nothing you can do about it. When people genuinely
want deliverance, you still have to deal with the evil
spirit in them by the leading of the Holy Spirit.
    On the other side of this issue, we have to realize
that not every problem in life is caused by a demon, just
as not everything that goes wrong in life is directly
caused by a demon either. Of course, the devil is
ultimately behind all the evil in the world. But because
we live in a world where Satan is god (2 Cor. 4:4),
problems, tests, and trial will occur.
    Jesus said, "In the world ye shall have tribulation:
but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world" (John
16:33). He also promised us the victory in every
situation: “... thanks be to God, which giveth us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ” (1 Cor. 15:57).
   I said there are times when people have to be dealt

                           179
                 The Triumphant Church


with in the natural by a person who is in charge,
because not everything that happens is caused by an
evil spirit. For example, parents need to train and
discipline their children in the natural, as well as pray
and watch over them spiritually.
   But right on the other hand, there is another side to
that coin. Many times, good people—even born-again,
Spirit-filled people can unconsciously yield to the devil
and cause problems in the church. In those instances,
you will have to deal with the evil spirit that is causing
the problems by exercising your authority in Christ.
    In most cases, you should deal with an evil spirit
privately. However, occasionally a minister may have to
deal publicly in his meeting with the devil operating
through a person.
    But normally in the privacy of your own prayer
closet you can just say, "You foul spirit that's operating
in the life of So-and-so, hindering and embarrassing
this church (or person), I command you to cease and
desist in your maneuvers in Jesus' Name."
   I was preaching along these lines in a Full Gospel
church, and a neighboring pastor in a larger city was
having some problems with certain members of his
congregation. The pastor where I was preaching gave
him my tapes on this subject to listen to.
    A couple of years later, the pastor of that
neighboring church told me, "There were three families
in my church who were causing all kinds of problems.
In fact, one of them was my deacon, one was my school
superintendent, and one of them was a board member.
The deacon was trying to get up a petition to kick me
out of the church.
   "I had been trying to deal with those three families


                           180
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


for a long time in the natural, but I never got anywhere.
Nothing I did seemed to work; they still caused all
kinds of problems in the church. After I heard your
tapes, I realized it was an evil spirit influencing these
people, causing all the trouble."
    You see, the devil can speak to Christians' minds,
and they can repeat what the devil is saying and create
division and strife (James 3:14-16). The Bible says that
Satan is the accuser of the brethren, and he can
influence believers to accuse one another (Rev. 12:10).
    The pastor told me that in the privacy of his own
study, he simply took authority over the evil spirits
causing the trouble in his church and commanded those
spirits to stop in their maneuvers against him.
    That pastor later told me, "Those people had been
causing problems for three years, but they changed
almost overnight. They were basically good, Christian
people. They just didn't realize they were yielding to the
devil and that the devil was using them to come against
the church. But once I dealt with the evil spirit causing
all the problems, those same people are now my
staunchest supporters."
    I am convinced the Body of Christ has more
authority than we've ever exercised. Instead of rising up
and using what is rightfully ours, we are too often prone
to drift along, hoping things will get better someday.
But we need to remember that the Bible says we
wrestle not against flesh and blood (Eph. 6:12). Too
much of the time we try to wrestle with flesh and blood
—with human beings—instead of dealing with the evil
spirit causing the problem.
    Now don't misunderstand me. As I said, there are
times you will have to deal with flesh and blood—you
will have to deal with people in the natural. But too

                           181
                 The Triumphant Church


much of the time, we're trying to do it all in the natural
in the energy of the flesh by wrestling with flesh and
blood. But thank God for the Name of Jesus, and for the
victory He already won for us over the powers of
darkness!

          The Man in the 1952 Vision
    As I said, there were three parts to the 1952 vision.
In the first part of the vision, Jesus showed me the
Christian woman who became oppressed, obsessed, and
finally possessed when she denied Christ.
    In the second part of the vision, Jesus taught me
how to deal with an evil spirit in a person to cast it out.
In the second part of the vision, I saw a man. I didn't
know him, but I knew he wasn't a believer; he'd never
been born again. In the vision Jesus said to me, "I will
show you how demons and evil spirits get ahold of a
person and how to cast them out of a person."
    In the vision I saw an evil spirit come and sit upon
this unsaved man's shoulder and whisper in his ear. I
don't know what the evil spirit said to the man because
Jesus didn't narrate that part. Jesus said to me, "This
man began to listen to the devil." The man not only
listened to the devil but began meditating on the
thoughts of the devil. As he continued to entertain the
devil's thoughts, the evil spirit went into the man's
mind.
    Then in the vision, the man's body became
transparent like his body was made out of glass, just as
the woman's body had. I could see a black dot in the
man's head about as big as a quarter. Jesus explained
that this evil spirit had first come from the outside to
attack the man's mind through oppression in the man's


                           182
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


thought life. That is the way the devil begins his
operation against a person—through his mind and his
thought life.
    Jesus said, "Because this man listened to the evil
spirit and opened his mind to the demon's suggestions,
the evil spirit was able to enter into the man's mind."
When the man did that, he became obsessed in his mind
—in his thinking. He liked dwelling on Satan's
thoughts.
    Just as Jesus had explained in the case of the
Christian woman who had become obsessed and then
possessed, Jesus said that this man could do something
himself about the devil and about thinking those kinds
of thoughts, even though he wasn't a believer.
    You see, even though this man wasn't a Christian,
he still had free choice, and he didn't have to think
those kind of thoughts. At any time he could have
chosen not to think like that even if he didn't recognized
that they were the devil's thoughts. At any time he
could have changed his thinking; he didn't need anyone
to change his thinking for him.
    Saved and unsaved people alike can choose to think
whatever they want to—good thoughts or evil thoughts
—because they have free choice. But the man continued
to yield to the devil's thoughts until he became obsessed
with those evil thoughts. Then Jesus said to me, "Now
he is obsessed with that kind of thinking, and the devil
has control of this mind."

     You Choose What You Think About
   You hear people say all the time, "I just can't help
the way I think." But, yes, you can if you want to. The
Bible says you can. You—not God, and certainly not the


                           183
                 The Triumphant Church


devil—are to control your own thoughts.
    It makes all the difference in the world what you
think about. God wants us to keep our thoughts
centered on Him and on His Word (Isa. 26:3). But if you
want to entertain wrong thoughts, God is not going to
stop you; He is not going to override your will. But if
you entertain wrong thoughts, you will open a door to
the devil in your life.
    Don't misunderstand me; God doesn't condone
wrong thoughts. He's given us instruction in His Word
what we are to think about (Phil. 4:8). But if you persist
in thinking wrong thoughts, God won't stop you. It's up
to you what you think about, not God., You can think
wrong thoughts if you want to, or you can resist them
and turn away from wrongdoing in your thought life.
    Sometimes believers consciously or unconsciously
open the door and invite Satan to come in. Or they may
do it ignorantly through a lack of knowledge of God's
Word, but nonetheless they give Satan consent to come
in to their lives through their thought life. A consent of
ignorance is still a consent.

       How Evil Spirits Let Other Evil
                 Spirits In
    In the vision, after the man became obsessed, Jesus
narrated, "This evil spirit obsessing this man is one of
the rulers of the darkness of this world—one of the
higher order of demon spirits. The rulers of the
darkness of this world are the ones that get ahold of a
person and will eventually possess him, if the person
lets him. And there are degrees of possession."
   Jesus then explained that when these rulers of the
darkness of this world, this higher order of evil spirits,


                           184
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


get ahold of an unsaved person, they let other spirits in
with them. Jesus said, "I'll show you how this higher
order of evil spirits lets in other evil spirits." Then in
the vision I saw the evil spirit in the man's mind hold
up something that looked like a trapdoor in the top of
the man's head.
    I watched as that demon that did the possessing let
many other evil spirits (they looked like big flies) enter
into the man through that trapdoor in the man's head.
So many of these big fly-like evil spirits came into the
man's mind through that trapdoor, I couldn't count
them all. They looked like big flies, but that ruling
spirit, the evil spirit that first whispered in the man's
ear, looked like a little monkey or an elf.
    Jesus talked to me about those evil spirits that
looked like flies. He explained that they were of a lower
order of evil spirit and primarily obeyed just what they
were told. They didn't have much intelligence of their
own.
    Do we find anything in Scripture about this lower
order of evil spirits that look like flies? Yes, we do.
Jesus reminded me of the account in Matthew 12:24
when the Pharisees accused Him of casting out devils,
not by the finger of God, but by Beelzebub (Matt. 12:24-
28). Jesus told me that Beelzebub means "lord of flies"
or "lord of the dunghill" (Matt. 12:24-28). In other
words, Beelzebub, or Satan, has dominion over and is
lord over all demons and evils spirits.
    In the vision, Jesus explained that one of the higher
class of demons—the rulers of darkness—first approach
a person in order to gain access to him and try to get
control of him, if the person will allow it. Then once that
higher order of demon gains access to the person, the
ruler of darkness lets in this lower class of evil spirits

                           185
                  The Triumphant Church


too.
   Once the ruler of darkness let the other spirits in
with it, in the vision, I saw the evil spirit of that higher
order go down inside the man into his spirit. Still
narrating, Jesus said, "Now the man is possessed by
that evil spirit."
    Jesus explained to me that even in the case of this
unsaved man, he was first just oppressed by the evil
spirit that came to whisper the devil's thoughts to his
mind. Then as the man yielded to thinking those
thoughts, he became obsessed with the devil's thoughts.
The man kept yielding his thinking to that evil spirit
until finally through the man's own consent the evil
spirit was able to possess the man's spirit.
    Then Jesus explained to me, "The higher class of
demons—a ruler of darkness—got control of the man
first, and it is the one that did the possessing. It is
always a ruler of darkness that does the possessing.
Then that higher order of demon let in all the others
with him." All of those evil spirits were in the man, of
course, but it was the demon of the higher order that
first enticed the man and entered his mind that fully
possessed him.

                   Full Possession
    After the Lord showed me how evil spirits gain
access to a person, He said to me, "From this night on,
when you are in the presence of one who is fully
possessed, the evil spirits will recognize you. They will
also recognize that you have authority over them."
    Jesus was speaking of the authority every believer
has in the Name of Jesus. Jesus said, "When a person is
fully possessed, the demon in him can use the person's


                            186
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


voice. The demon may speak and say, 'I know who you
are.' Evil spirits will know you, just as they knew who I
was. They will know you just as the demon in the young
woman in Philippi knew who Paul and Silas were" (Acts
16:17).
  Jesus gave me Mark 5:6,7 and His dealings with the
madman of Gadara to substantiate this:
   But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and
   worshipped him, And cried WITH A LOUD
   VOICE, and said, What have I to do with thee,
   Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure
   thee by God, that thou torment me not.

    The demon that possessed the man knew exactly
who Jesus was: “... What have I to do with thee, JESUS,
THOU SON OF THE MOST HIGH GOD? ...” (Mark
5:7). In the natural, the madman himself couldn't have
known who Jesus was because he had dwelt in the
tombs and hadn't mixed with society.
   In the vision Jesus said to me, "Particularly when
you are in the presence of those who are fully possessed,
the evil spirits will recognize you and will speak to you
using the person's voice, saying, 'I know who you are.'"
   Jesus explained that when a person is fully
possessed, the demon's voice speaking through the
person can be heard in the natural realm. It doesn't
take the gift of discerning of spirits to hear that because
the possessing demon uses the person's vocal chords to
speak in the natural realm.
   Jesus said to me, "If you had been there that day, in
the natural realm with your own physical ears you
would have heard this man talking to Me. But in reality
it was the demon that possessed him doing the
speaking—not the man himself."


                           187
                 The Triumphant Church


    In other words, when the demon in the madman of
Gadara cried out with a loud voice, “... What have I to
do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I
adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not” (Mark
5:7), that was heard in the natural realm. The ruler of
darkness was speaking through this man, using his
voice, and anyone present that day could have heard
him say that.
    Jesus also said if I had been there that day, I would
have heard the possessing demon answer Jesus and
say, “... My name is Legion: for we are many ...” (Mark
5:9). The possessing demon named Legion was using
the man's vocal chords to talk to Jesus.
    Jesus said, "But if you had been there, or if any
other human being had been present that day, you
would not have heard all the devils speak up and say to
Me, 'Send us into the swine, that we may enter into
them' [Mark 5:12]. That could only be heard in the
spiritual realm by the gift of discerning of spirits in
manifestation."
    You see, when all those demons spoke up and said
that to Jesus, they were not talking through the man,
using the man's voice. They were speaking in the spirit
realm, and Jesus heard them because the gift of
discerning of spirits was in manifestation in His life.
    Jesus told me that because I had this gift of
discerning of spirits, at times I would see and hear into
the realm of spirits when I was in the Spirit. That
scares some people, but it shouldn't because “... greater
is he that is in you, than he that is in the world” (1 John
4:4).
    Sometimes when I've been ministering in healing
lines, for example, I've had evil spirits in people speak
to me before I've ever said a word to the person. I heard

                           188
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


those evil spirits speak in the spirit realm. People can
hear me tell them to leave, but no one else hears the
evil spirits talking because they can only be heard in
the spirit realm through the gift of discerning of spirits.
    For example, sometimes in the healing line evil
spirits have said very emphatically to me, "I don't
intend to go!" I just say, "You have to go in the Name of
Jesus. Leave this person in the Name of Jesus," and the
evil spirits always depart and the people are delivered.
Many times when I'm in the Spirit, I've seen them
depart, although there was no visible manifestation in
the person. God's Word works; we have authority over
all the power of the devil (Luke 10:19).

      Jesus and the Madman of Gadara
    Jesus said, "In dealing with evil spirits, you will
know the kind of demon you are dealing with by
revelation—either through the word of knowledge or
discerning of spirits. When I walked up to that madman
of Gadara, I discerned what kind of a spirit it was that
possessed him. It was an unclean spirit: "For he [Jesus]
said unto him, Come out of the man, thou UNCLEAN
SPIRIT" (Mark 5:8).
    Jesus explained to me, "You see, I was not
ministering by some power inherent in Me because I am
the Son of God. When I came to this world, I laid aside
My mighty power and glory, as the Scriptures say (Phil.
2:6-8). I was ministering under the anointing of the
Spirit of God by the gifts of the Spirit, just as any other
believer would minister.
   "And because I was ministering by the anointing of
the Spirit of God, I had to depend upon the Holy Spirit
to manifest Himself through Me. In this case, the Holy


                           189
                 The Triumphant Church


Spirit manifested Himself through the gift of discerning
of spirits. That's the reason I knew it was an unclean
spirit that was governing this man."
   If you have a revelation of the kind of spirit that is
present in a person through a word of knowledge, you
know what kind of evil spirit is present. If you have a
revelation of the kind of spirit that is present through
the gift of discerning of spirits, you see or hear what
kind of evil spirit is present.
   Jesus explained to me, "Ordinarily, if there is only
one spirit and you command him to come out, he will
come out." Then Jesus said something that startled me.
   He said, "I had already perceived or discerned that
the man had an unclean spirit, but when I commanded
the unclean spirit to come out, it didn't come out. So
then I asked him what his name was" (Mark 5:8,9).
   We can see in Luke's account that Jesus commanded
the unclean spirit to come out, but it didn't come out
until Jesus found out its name and in this case, its
number.
   LUKE 8:28-30
   28 When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell
   down before him, and with a loud voice said,
   What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of
   God most high? I beseech thee, torment me not.
   29 (For he [Jesus] HAD COMMANDED the
   unclean spirit to come out of the man. For
   oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept
   bound with chains and in fetters; and he brake
   the bands, and was driven of the devil into the
   wilderness.)
   30 And Jesus asked him, saying, WHAT IS THY
   NAME? And he said Legion: because many
   devils were entered into him.


                          190
              How to Deal With Evil Spirits


    Jesus explained that the unclean spirit didn't come
out of the man until Jesus asked the evil spirit its
name. The unclean spirit gave its name: “... My name is
Legion: for we are many" (Mark 5:9). Jesus said in this
case, its name and number was the same—Legion.
Legion was its name, but it was also its number. So in
dealing with the madman of Gadara, Jesus Himself had
to know the name of the spirit before He could cast it
out.
    Jesus explained that through discerning of spirits or
a word of knowledge, when I am in the Spirit (or when
these gifts are operating through any believer when he
is in the Spirit), I would know what kind of spirit
possesses a person. But in some cases Jesus said it
would also be necessary to know the name of the evil
spirit or sometimes the number of spirits involved in
order to cast them out. If an evil spirit didn't come out
when I commanded it to come out, I should ask its
name and its number—how many evil spirits are in the
person.
   Then still in the vision, Jesus told me to walk up to
the unsaved man I was seeing in the vision. The minute
I did, the evil spirit in the man spoke to me just as
Jesus had said it would, saying, "I know you! I know
who you are!"
    I said, "Yes, I know you know who I am. And you
also know I have authority over you in the Name of
Jesus!"
    Then Jesus said to me, "Now tell that evil spirit to
be quiet. Don't let him talk."
   Nowhere in Scripture do you find that Jesus ever
held a conversation with demons. He always told them,
"Hold your peace!" (Mark 1:25; Luke 4:35). Jesus
explained that the only exception to this is when you

                          191
                 The Triumphant Church


command an evil spirit to come out, and it doesn't come
out, then you need to ask the evil spirit his name or the
number of evil spirits involved. That is the only case in
which Jesus spoke further to an evil spirit—and it was
only to demand its name (Mark 5:9).
    In the vision, I commanded the evil spirit in the
man to be quiet in the Name of Jesus. On the inside of
me I knew by revelation of the Holy Spirit what kind of
evil spirit was possessing the man and talking to me. It
was a deceiving spirit. So I said, "You foul deceiving
spirit, I command you to come out of this man in the
Name of Jesus." Nothing happened; the evil spirit didn't
come out.
   Then in the vision Jesus emphasized again to me,
"When you know the kind of evil spirit it is, and it still
doesn't come out, then you need to know its number."
So in the vision, I asked the evil spirit possessing the
man, "What is your name or number?" Deceiving wasn't
the name of the spirit; it was just its kind.
   The evil spirit in the man answered, "There are
nineteen more in here besides me." Once I found out its
number, that's all I needed to know. I said, "I command
you and all nineteen others to come out of the man in
the Name of Jesus." Then in the realm of the spirit, I
saw those evil spirits leave the man.

    Where Do Evil Spirits Go When Cast
                   Out?
    You remember in Mark 5:13, the devils went into
the swine and the swine ran off the cliff and perished in
the sea. The Bible also says evil spirits “... besought him
[Jesus] that he would not command them to go out into
the deep" (Luke 8:31).


                           192
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


    So I asked Jesus, "Where do evil spirits go when
they are cast out of a person?" I'd heard preachers try to
cast evil spirits into the abyss or pit (Rev. 20:3). So I
asked Jesus if I should cast these spirits into the pit or
into hell.
    Jesus answered, "No, you can't cast evil spirits into
hell or into the abyss. The Bible says that when I would
go into the synagogues, those demons would cry out, “...
What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God?
art thou come hither to torment us BEFORE THE
TIME?" (Matt. 8:29).
    Jesus said, "You see, their time hasn't come yet.
Don't you know that if it were possible to cast evil
spirits into the abyss, when I was on the earth, I would
have cast all of them in there I could. That would have
left that many less for you to put up with."
    Why hasn't the time come yet for evil spirits to be
cast into the abyss? Because Satan is presently 'the god
of this world' until Adam's lease runs out that Satan
has been using (2 Cor. 4:4), Satan has a legal right—but
not a moral right—to be here.
   I asked Jesus, "What happens to those evil spirits
that are cast out of people?"
   Jesus said, "Haven't you ever read in My Word,
'When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
through dry places seeking rest'" (Matt. 12:43). Then in
the vision, I saw the demon that had possessed the
man, walking through dry places.
    Jesus continued, "When you cast evil spirits out of
people, they walk through the dry places. They are still
here on earth seeking rest. And finding none, they try
to go back to the "house" they came out of, if that person
will let them back in [Matt. 12:44], They will stay in


                           193
                 The Triumphant Church


that person until they are cast out again or until the
person dies."
   The person's body or soul becomes the demon's
"house." So when the person dies, the demon will leave
that "house" and look for someone else to inhabit.
    Some years after this vision, I was standing in a
hospital room when a man died who had had a serious
stomach problem. When he died, something jumped
from him to me. (Not all stomach problems are caused
by the presence of a demon, but they can be.) That thing
hit me in the stomach like I'd been shot with a BB gun,
and my stomach began to burn like fire. I said, "No, you
don't, devil! You are not getting into me, in Jesus'
Name!" And that demon left me immediately.

                A Word of Caution
    There is something we need to realize about
spiritual things. Every revelation or vision must be
looked at in the light of God's Word. In other words, just
because you've had a vision, don't just accept it and run
away with it and begin to build doctrine on it and teach
it wherever you go. Compare it with the Word of God
and see if it lines up.
    If I have a spiritual revelation of any kind, I don't
just run out and began acting on it or began teaching it.
I stop and think over what I've seen and meditate on it
in the light of God's Word before I start implementing
what I've learned or teaching it. The Lord told me one
time He would rather I be too slow than too fast.
    Jesus told me that some people receive a little
revelation, and they grab it and run off with it and
many times get into error. They usually end up getting
things in a mess. It's better to be careful and let the


                           194
              How to Deal With Evil Spirits


Lord lead and guide you as to how to use spiritual
revelations and not run ahead of Him with them.
    About two months after this vision, I had the
opportunity to implement what I had learned in this
vision about dealing with demons. I was holding a
meeting at a church in Texas. One of the board
members of a church in a nearby city asked me to hold
a meeting for them after I closed my meeting. So after I
finished my meeting, I drove over to the nearby city and
checked into the hotel where the church had made
accommodations for me.
   In the afternoon, the board member who had talked
to me earlier called me on the telephone. He asked,
"Brother Hagin, could you help me. You've never met
my son, but he is thirty-eight years old and has never
been saved. He drinks and takes drugs. He comes to
stay with us sometimes, but we can't do anything with
him. He has spells and goes wild and starts breaking up
the furniture. We've had to call the police to come and
put him in jail for our own protection." It seemed the
devil had tried to drive this young man insane.
    The board member said, "He's here with us now,
and he's had one of his spells. He picked up a huge
piece of furniture and broke it in two with his bare
hands. It's so large, two or three men couldn't have
broken it. He picked up a piano and threw it against the
wall, just like you'd pick up a book and throw it."
    That's supernatural strength! Remember, the Bible
says the madman of Gadara broke every chain and
fetter (Mark 5:4) because he possessed supernatural
strength. The board member asked, "Would you come
over and help us?"
  I drove to his home. When I got to the house, the
man and his wife took me to their son who sat slouched

                          195
                 The Triumphant Church


over on a couch with his head in his hands. This couple
didn't say one word of introduction as we entered the
room. Their son didn't know they had called me or who
I was; we had never met before. But the minute I
walked into the room, their son immediately looked up
at me and said, "I know you! I know who you are! I saw
you when you came into town at ten minutes after two
o'clock this afternoon!"
   He then proceeded to tell me the very street I had
come down and told me each turn I had made, calling
each street by name. Then he told me the name of the
hotel I had checked into. He told me exactly the way I
came into town, and exactly what time I had arrived. No
man could have known those things.
    The demon who possessed that man was using his
voice and had revealed these things to him. I answered,
"Yes, I know you know me, but in the Name of Jesus, be
quiet! In the Name of Jesus, come out of him!"
    Just like you'd snap your fingers, the man's
countenance and his whole personality completely
changed! He brightened up and looked completely
normal. There was no other visible manifestation of his
deliverance. I didn't see any spirits leave the man, and
nothing else happened visibly, but the man was totally
delivered.
    We make a mistake thinking there always has to be
some kind of manifestation when someone is delivered
of evil spirits. Whether you see the evil spirits leave or
not, what's important is that the person is delivered.

      The Third Part of the 1952 Vision
   There was a third part of the 1952 vision about
demons and evil spirits and how to deal with them. In


                           196
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


the third part of the vision, Jesus gave me further
instruction about how to deal with demons. Here's what
happened. As Jesus was talking to me in this vision, all
of a sudden a demon ran up between us. It looked a lot
like a monkey, but his face was more human looking.
     The demon ran up between Jesus and me and began
to jump up and down in the air, and as he did, he put
out something like a black cloud or a smoke screen.
When he did that, it became hard to see Jesus. Then the
little imp began to jump up and down and throw his
arms and legs out, and in a high-pitched shrill voice, he
began to scream, "Yakety yak yak! Yakety yak yak!"
    The entire time this was happening, Jesus went
right on talking. I could hear Jesus talking, but I
couldn't distinguish His words. And then because of
that smoke screen, I finally couldn't see Jesus anymore
either. This probably lasted just a few seconds, but it
seemed like it lasted many minutes.
   I thought to myself, Doesn't Jesus know I can't hear
what He's saying! Doesn't He know I'm not getting
what He's saying! And then I thought, Why doesn't
Jesus tell him to stop! Doesn't He know I can't hear
Him?
    Finally, in desperation, and without really thinking,
I just pointed my finger at that little demon and said, "I
command you to cease and desist in Jesus' Name!"
When I said those words, that little demon hit the floor,
kerflop! The black cloud disappeared, and he just lay on
the floor, shaking and trembling like a little whipped
pup, crying and whining.
   Jesus looked at him and then looked at me, and
pointing to the little demon, He said, "If you hadn't
done something about that evil spirit, I couldn't have."


                           197
                 The Triumphant Church


   I said, "Lord, I know I misunderstood You. You
didn't say if I hadn't done something about that demon,
You couldn't have. You said You wouldn't have, didn't
You?"
    Pointing to the demon as he lay trembling on the
floor, Jesus repeated, "No, I said, 'If you hadn't done
something about that evil spirit, I couldn't have.'"
    I shook my head, thinking it was my hearing that
was faulty. I said, "Something is wrong with me. I
didn't hear right. You didn't say if I hadn't done
something about that evil spirit, You couldn't have. You
said You wouldn't have, didn't You?"
   He repeated the same words, "No, I said, 'If you
hadn't done something about that evil spirit, I couldn't
have.'"
    I said, "Lord, something is wrong. I'm not hearing
right," and I repeated my question the third time. I
think I know how Jesus must have looked when He got
angry and took that rope and drove those money
changers out of the Temple (Mark 11:15). It looked to
me like His eyes shot little flashes of lightning, and He
said, "No! I said I couldn't have!"
   I said, "I can't accept that. Lord, that's different
than anything I've ever preached or heard. Lord, that
upends my theology." You see, in religious circles we
had always prayed, "God, You rebuke the devil" or
"Jesus, You rebuke the devil."
   The Lord answered, "Sometimes your theology
needs upending."
     I said, "I've never heard anything like that in my
life. Lord, I won't accept any vision, or any divine
visitation, I don't care if I am seeing You and hearing
You talk to me as plain and as real as any man in the

                          198
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


natural—I won't accept that unless You can prove what
You're saying to me by the holy written Word of God.
The Bible says, 'By the mouth of two or three witnesses,
let every word be established' [Matt. 18:16]. I won't
believe what You are telling me unless You can give me
three witnesses from the New Testament."
    You see, we live under the New Covenant or the
New Testament. I'm not so concerned about the Old
Covenant. Now don't misunderstand me. I believe it, of
course, and I understand its value. But I'm not trying to
get back under the Old Covenant and live under its
rules and regulations because it was written for
spiritually dead people; they weren't born again. Under
the New Covenant, we are made new creatures and our
human spirits are recreated.
   Jesus smiled so sweetly at me and said, "I'll go you
one better. I'll give you four."
   Jesus said to me, "To pray that I, the Lord Jesus
Christ, or that God the Father would do anything about
the devil is to waste your time."
    I said, "Dear God, I've wasted a lot of time!" A lot of
folks today are wasting their time!
    Then Jesus said, "God the Father and I have done
all that We are ever going to do about the devil until the
time when the angel of God will come down from
Heaven and bind the devil with a chain and put him in
the bottomless pit for a thousand years [Rev. 20:1-3].
Until that time, Heaven is not going to do anything else
about the devil."
    You see, God sent Jesus, and Jesus already did
something about the devil: “... For this purpose the Son
of God was manifested, that he might DESTROY THE
WORKS OF THE DEVIL” (1 John 3:8). Jesus defeated


                           199
                 The Triumphant Church


the devil in His death, burial, and resurrection (Col.
2:15). Now the believer is expected to exercise his
rightful authority over the devil.
   Jesus said, "In every Epistle that's written to the
Church—to believers—if the writer of the Epistle said
anything about the devil, he always told believers that
they were to do something about the devil. I'm going to
give you four references to prove that believers
themselves have authority over the devil."

      Believers, Not God, Must Exercise
          Authority Over the Devil
    Jesus began with Matthew 28:18 to show me that
believers are the ones on the earth who have authority
over the devil.
   MATTHEW 28:18
   And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying,
   ALL POWER is given unto me IN HEAVEN and
   IN EARTH.

   Jesus said, "When I arose from the dead, I
immediately said to My disciples, 'All power is given to
Me both in Heaven and in earth'" (Matt. 28:18).
   "Now this Greek word translated 'power' is also
translated authority elsewhere in the New Testament.
So you could read this verse, 'All authority is given unto
Me both in Heaven and in earth.'
   "Now," Jesus said to me, "if you stop reading at the
end of verse 18, you'd say to Me, 'Why, Lord Jesus, You
do have authority on earth against devils and demons.
You can do something on the earth about the devil
because this verse says You have authority on the
earth.' But I immediately took My authority on the
earth and delegated it to believers—to the Church. I

                           200
              How to Deal With Evil Spirits


immediately said, “Go YE....”
   MATTHEW 28:19,20
   19 GO YE therefore, and teach all nations,
   baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
   the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
   20 Teaching them to observe all things
   whatsoever I have commanded you....

   MARK 16:15,17
   15 And he [Jesus] said unto them, GO YE into all
   the world, and preach the gospel to every
   creature....
   17 And these signs shall follow them that
   believe; In my name shall they CAST OUT
   DEVILS....

    Jesus said to me, "The first sign that is to follow
believers is that in My Name they shall cast out devils.
Believers couldn't cast out devils if they didn't have
authority over them. I gave the Church that authority.
In fact, a better way to say that would be, 'In My Name
believers shall exercise authority over devils.'"
   So many times Christians ask the question, "Why
does God permit the devil to do such terrible things on
the earth? Why doesn't God do something about the
devil?"
    There are many things that happen in life that we
wonder about. But, really, God is waiting for us to
exercise our authority and do something about the
devil. His Word stands behind the authority He's given
us.
   But so many times we just bow down and let the
devil run over us, waiting for God to do something
about the devil, when we just need to take our stand
against him with the Word and put him on the run. We


                          201
                 The Triumphant Church


need to do something about the adverse circumstances
in our own lives by taking authority over Satan and
standing our ground against him with the Word,
claiming what belongs to us.
    Then Jesus gave me James 4:7 as the second
scriptural witness that believers have the authority on
the earth over the devil.
   JAMES 4:7
   7 Submit yourselves therefore to God. RESIST
   THE DEVIL, and he will FLEE from you.

    James was writing to the Church—to believers—
when he told them to resist the devil. Jesus said to me,
"James didn't say, 'Get your pastor to resist the devil
for you.' Or 'Get fellow Christians to resist the devil for
you.' He said you are to resist the devil. You couldn't
resist the devil if you didn't have authority over him."
   I saw this truth. James didn't say, "Go get Jesus to
rebuke the devil." Or "Go get God to resist the devil for
you." He said, "You resist the devil and he will flee from
you" (James 4:7). You is the understood subject of the
sentence.
    I looked up the word "flee" in the dictionary later
and saw that one definition of "flee" is to run away from
as in terror. Demons and evil spirits are not afraid of
us, but they are afraid of Jesus, whom we represent.
Therefore, because we are in Christ, they will flee from
us when we take our authority over them in Jesus'
Name.
   Some have said, "I'll just write in a request and have
a preacher pray for me. I'll write to that Hagin fellow.
He's got faith. Maybe if he prays, the devil will leave me
alone." No, each believer has to take authority over the
devil for himself. We don't need to get someone else to


                           202
              How to Deal With Evil Spirits


do something about the devil for us.
    Satan can't take any authority in your life unless
you give him authority. Of course, if you don't exercise
your authority over him or take a stand against him in
the tests and trials he brings against you, then nothing
will be done about the situation, because you are the
one in authority on the earth through Jesus' Name.
    Then Jesus gave me First Peter 5:8 as the third
scriptural witness that believers have authority over
the devil.
   1 PETER 5:8,9
   8 Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary
   the devil, AS a roaring lion, walketh about,
   seeking whom he may devour:
   9 WHOM RESIST STEDFAST IN THE FAITH....

   The Bible says, "your adversary the devil," so we
know we do have an enemy. The word "adversary"
means an enemy or an opponent. It means one who is
arrayed against us.
   But remember this adversary is a defeated foe;
therefore, he can only walk about as a roaring lion. The
Bible doesn't say he is a roaring lion. That isn't to say
your adversary isn't real; he is very real. But he has
been defeated by Jesus Christ.
    Why is Satan walking about as a roaring lion?
Because he is "seeking whom he may devour." He isn't
trying to devour sinners; they already belong to him. He
is seeking to devour Christians, and he will devour
them if they let him.
   What are you going to do about the devil? Are you
going to stick your head in the sand like an ostrich and
hope he'll go away? Are you going to let him devour
you? No! A thousand times no! Stand your ground with

                          203
                 The Triumphant Church


the sword of the Spirit and the Name of Jesus in the
victory Jesus won over him and put him to flight!
    When Jesus appeared to me in this 1952 vision, it
was the heyday of the healing revival, and some people
in that day had gotten off in this area of the devil and
evil spirits just as they have today. Because of this
error, Jesus had to bring correction in the area of
demonology in order to get the Body of Christ back on
track and in the middle of the road again.
    Our problem has been that we want someone else to
take care of the devil for us. Notice that Peter wrote his
epistle to Christians; he didn't write it to sinners. In
other words, he was telling Christians to resist the
devil. He wouldn't tell them to resist the devil if it was
impossible for them to do it.
    After Jesus pointed out these scriptures proving
that believers have authority over the devil, He said to
me, "If Peter had been like some believers today, he
would have said, 'Word has come to us that God is using
our beloved brother Paul in an unusual way. Paul is
laying hands on cloths and handkerchiefs, and diseases
and evil spirits are departing from people. Therefore, I
suggest you write to Paul and get one of those
handkerchiefs.' But Peter didn't tell believers that.
Peter told believers, 'You do something about the devil
yourself.'"
    Look again at First Peter 5:9: "Whom [YOU] resist
stedfast in the faith...." "You" is the understood subject
of that sentence. "You resist the devil and he will flee
from you." "You resist the devil steadfast in your faith
in God's Word." That comes right back to the fact that
you are the only one who can resist the devil in your
own life. You resist the devil by your faith in what God
says in His Word.

                           204
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


    Jesus said to me, "That's the reason if you hadn't
done something about that devil, I couldn't have." I saw
it then! As a member of the Body of Christ, I had the
authority over that devil that jumped up between Jesus
and me. And if I hadn't exercised my authority over
that evil spirit, nothing would have been done about
him.
   That's why you need to put the devil on the run with
the Word of God. However, if your mind hasn't been
renewed with the Word, you are in trouble because you
probably wouldn't know how to take your rightful
position in Christ so you can take your stand against
the enemy. And because of your lack of knowledge,
you'd let the enemy defeat you because you wouldn't
know who you are in Christ and the authority you
really possess.
    Jesus also gave me Ephesians 4:27 as the fourth
scriptural witness that proves believers are the ones
who have authority over the devil.
   EPHESIANS 4:27
   27 Neither give place to the devil.

   Paul was writing to Christians, saying, "Don't give
the devil any place in you." If the Bible says not to give
the devil any place, it stands to reason that you can give
the devil place in your life. On the other hand, if you
can keep from giving him a place in you, then you must
have authority over him.
    Actually, the devil can't take any place in you unless
you give it to him by permission or ignorance or just by
failing to exercise the authority that already belongs to
you.
   How are you to keep the devil from taking a place in
you? You'll have to submit to God first. Only then will

                           205
                 The Triumphant Church


you be in a position to resist the devil. Then when you
resist the devil, he will flee (James 4:7).
   When Jesus gave me these scriptures, I saw how we
had been missing it. The Church has tried to get God to
rebuke the devil for us. Or we've tried to get Jesus to
deal with the devil in our lives. We've tried to get
someone else to exercise our authority over the devil for
us, and it won't work because Jesus delegated that
authority to each one of us.
    Then Jesus said to me, "These are the four
scriptural witnesses I told you I would give you instead
of just two or three. I am the first, James is the second,
Peter is the third, and Paul is the fourth.
    "These scriptures establish the fact that the believer
has authority on earth, for I have delegated My
authority over the devil to the Body of Christ. If
believers don't do anything about the devil, then nothing
will be done about him in their lives."
   God has already done all He is ever going to do
about the devil in our lives because God sent Jesus to
dethrone Satan! So if we allow Satan to ride roughshod
over us, it's because we have not taken our stand
against him with the Word.

          Other Scriptural 'Witnesses'
   ROMANS 6:14
   14 For sin shall not have dominion over you: for
   ye are not under the law, but under grace.

   Paul writing to believers said, “... sin shall not have
dominion over you ...” (Rom. 6:14). Another translation
says, "For sin shall not lord it over you."
   If anything has dominion over you, that means it


                           206
               How to Deal With Evil Spirits


lords it over you. The Bible is saying that sin is not to
lord it over you. Sin and Satan are synonymous terms.
It wouldn't be an injustice to read that verse like this:
"For Satan shall not have dominion over you."
    Why shouldn't Satan have dominion over you?
Because if you're born again, you're not under the law of
sin and death; you're under grace (Rom. 6:14; 8:2). And
Satan is not your lord, Jesus is (Col. 1:13). Therefore,
sin and Satan can't dominate you, unless you allow it.
    John also wrote a letter to believers. He addressed
this same subject.
   1 JOHN 4:1-4
   1 Beloved, BELIEVE NOT EVERY SPIRIT, but
   TRY THE SPIRITS WHETHER THEY ARE OF
   GOD: because many false prophets are gone out
   into the world.
   2 Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit
   that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the
   flesh is of God:
   3 And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus
   Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this
   is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have
   heard that it should come; and even now
   already is it in the world.
   4 Ye are of God, little children, and HAVE
   OVERCOME THEM: because greater is he that
   is in you, than he that is in the world.

    Verse 1 says, "Beloved, believe not every spirit... . "
That verse surely fits us today. Many folks today are
believing every spirit and every spiritual experience,
vision, and manifestation. But, no, we are to examine
spiritual experiences in the light of God's Word and “...
every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh is not of God...” (1 John 4:3).


                           207
                  The Triumphant Church


    Don't just believe every spirit. John says, "... try the
spirits whether they are of God: because many false
prophets are gone out into the world" (v. 1).
    Notice that the Bible talks about false prophets in
connection with evil spirits. That's because prophets
operate in the spirit realm and they should be
motivated by the Holy Spirit, but too many times they
are motivated by wrong spirits because they don't
discern the difference.
    Verse 4 says, "Ye are of God, little children... . " That
refers to our position in Christ and our rightstanding
with God. It also refers to our authority over the devil
because as children of God we are seated with Christ in
heavenly places (Eph. 1:20).
    Then what does the rest of that scripture say? "Ye
are of God, little children, and have overcome THEM ..."
(1 John 4:4). Who is "them" referring to? What have
believers overcome? The word "them" is referring to the
evil spirits that John mentioned in the previous verses.
In other words, when Jesus overcame Satan, because
we are in Christ, Jesus' triumph over Satan is our
triumph! In Christ we are to enforce Satan's defeat in
our lives by standing against the devil with God's Word.
    The Bible doesn't say, "You are going to overcome
evil spirits and demons in the sweet by and by." It said,
"You have overcome them because .. greater is he that is
in you, than he that is in the world"' (v.4).
    The Bible says, "... Christ in you, the hope of glory"
(Col. 1:27). Jesus spoiled and put to naught
principalities and powers and made a show of them
openly by triumphing over them in the Cross (Col. 2:15).
Therefore, because Jesus overcame the devil and every
evil spirit, and you are in Christ, you have overcome
them too. That's a past-tense fact!

                            208
              How to Deal With Evil Spirits


    When Jesus overcame Satan and his host of evil
spirits and demons, God marked that down as though
every believer did it because we are in Christ. Jesus
was our Substitute. He defeated Satan for us, not for
Himself.
  Therefore, if you're born again, you have the Greater
One—the Victor over Satan—living on the inside of you.
   John G. Lake once said that he got so mad about
these fellows who are always running around talking
about demons all the time and magnifying the devil,
that he almost wanted to cuss. They magnified the devil
by always talking about him and what he's doing in
their lives and on the earth and how great his power is.
    Lake said some people talk like the devil is a great
big fellow—a huge giant—and God is a little bitty
fellow, maybe two feet tall. People who talk like that
say, "You'd better watch out for the devil." These people
are so devil-conscious, they very seldom talk about
Jesus. But the more you magnify the devil, the greater
he is going to become in your life.
    Some believers seem to have more respect for the
devil and his ability and believe in him more than they
do in God!
   Take your place in Christ. Stand your ground on
God's Word. Be careful about keeping company with
people who are always talking about the devil and who
don't magnify the Word of God. And don't pick up on
every spiritual "fad" that's going on. Stay with the
Word. Preach the Word, not what the devil is doing. And
stay in the middle of the road doctrinally and avoid
extremes, including in this area of demons.
   You don't have to go looking for the devil, but if he
shows up, kick him out. You have authority over him in


                          209
                The Triumphant Church


Jesus. Put him on the run with the Word. The devil
knows that when you find out who you are in Christ
and begin to take your rightful position of authority
over him, he won't be able to keep you under his thumb
anymore.




                         210
                  Chapter 7
          7   The Wisdom of God
    God has provided a glorious inheritance for every
believer. That inheritance includes dominion over all
the works of darkness, including sin, sickness, disease,
and spiritual death.
   But in order for us to take advantage of our
authority in Jesus so we can successfully stand against
the devil's strategies in every circumstance, the eyes of
our spiritual understanding need to be enlightened.
    The believer's inheritance in Christ is the wisdom of
God, and it was hidden throughout previous ages until
it was revealed through Jesus Christ. Grasping that
truth and walking in the reality of God's inheritance for
us as saints is the key to taking our place as the
triumphant Church, reigning as kings in this life.
    The riches of our inheritance are revealed more fully
in the Book of Ephesians than in any other book of the
Bible. In Ephesians chapter 1 and 3 are Spirit-inspired
prayers, which apply to believers everywhere because
they were given by the Holy Spirit to the Body of
Christ.
   EPHESIANS 1:16-23
   16 [I] Cease not to give thanks for you, making
   mention of you in my prayers,
   17 That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
   Father of glory, MAY GIVE UNTO YOU THE
   SPIRIT OF WISDOM AND REVELATION IN
   THE KNOWLEDGE OF HIM [and of being in
   Him]:


                          211
            The Triumphant Church

18 The EYES OF YOUR UNDERSTANDING
BEING ENLIGHTENED; that ye may know what
is the hope of his calling, and what [are] the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the
saints,
19 And what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to usward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty power,
20 Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised
him from the dead, and set him at his own right
hand in the heavenly places,
21 FAR ABOVE ALL PRINCIPALITY, and
POWER, and MIGHT, and DOMINION, and
EVERY NAME THAT IS NAMED, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come:
22 And HATH PUT ALL THINGS UNDER HIS
FEET, and gave him to be the head over all
things to the church,
23 Which is his body, the fulness of him that
filleth all in all.

EPHESIANS 3:14-21
14 For this cause I BOW MY KNEES UNTO THE
FATHER OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST,
15 Of whom the whole family in heaven and
earth is named,
16 That he would grant you, according to the
riches of his glory, TO BE STRENGTHENED
WITH MIGHT BY HIS SPIRIT IN THE INNER
MAN;
17 That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in
love,
18 MAY BE ABLE TO COMPREHEND WITH ALL
SAINTS WHAT IS THE BREADTH, and
LENGTH, and DEPTH, and HEIGHT;
19 And to know the love of Christ, which


                     212
                   The Wisdom of God

   passeth knowledge, that YE MIGHT BE FILLED
   WITH ALL THE FULNESS OF GOD.
   20 Now unto him that is able to do EXCEEDING
   ABUNDANTLY ABOVE ALL that we ask or
   think, ACCORDING TO THE POWER THAT
   WORKETH IN US,
   21 Unto him be glory in the church by Christ
   Jesus throughout all ages, world without end.
   Amen.

   If you are a believer, you can pray these prayers for
yourself by putting "I," "me," and "my" where Paul says
"you" and "your."
    In these prayers, the Holy Spirit wants to reveal to
believers "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of Jesus" (Eph. 1:17). What is the wisdom
and knowledge God wants to reveal to the believer
about Jesus Christ?
    The Holy Spirit wants the eyes of our understanding
opened to understand Jesus' complete victory over
Satan in the triumph of the Cross. He wants us to
understand what Jesus' seating on High really means
to the believer. The wisdom and knowledge the Holy
Spirit wants to reveal to us is the believer's joint-
seating with Christ as a benefit of our redemption.
Joint-seating with Christ is a position of authority and
triumph over Satan. God wants us to see what we have
as rights and privileges by being in Christ.

     Revelations in Line With the Word
   In the last church I pastored in 1949, I did a lot of
extra praying and seeking God. Every opportunity I'd
have, I prayed these prayers in Ephesians and
Philippians over and over for myself. Scripture is given
by the Holy Spirit, so it never loses its inspiration and

                          213
                 The Triumphant Church


power.
    The Holy Spirit, writing through Paul, wants you as
a believer to pray for the eyes of your understanding to
be enlightened. The word "enlightened" means
illuminated or flooded with light. Another translation
says to pray that the eyes of your heart will be flooded
with light.
    After praying these prayers for a number of months,
one day I was praying at the altar and the Lord spoke
to me and said, "I am going to take you on to revelations
and visions." That came as a result of praying these
prayers thousands of times for myself. Revelation from
the Word of God began to come to me and kept on
coming. I am talking about revelations in line with the
Word.
   Finally, I said to my wife, "What in the world have I
been preaching!" I had been in the ministry fourteen
years, but in six months of praying these prayers for
myself, I received so much revelation from the Word of
God that it seemed like I was a brand-new person.
    That's what Ephesians 1 is talking about—insight
into the knowledge of Jesus and understanding of the
knowledge of His Word.
    It was in the winter of '47 and '48 that
understanding in line with God's Word by the Holy
Spirit began to come to me. Then in the '50s the visions
started coming. From 1950 through 1959, the Lord
Jesus Himself appeared to me eight different times.
Three out of the eight times He talked to me for an hour
and a half and brought me further revelation
concerning the Word of God.
   One revelation the Spirit of God brought to me was
the believer's authority in Christ over Satan. In fact, in


                           214
                  The Wisdom of God


the 1952 vision when Jesus talked to me for an hour
and a half, I received understanding concerning demons
and evil spirits. This understanding came after praying
these prayers for the eyes of my understanding to be
enlightened. Jesus Christ, the Head of the Church, gave
me biblical truths in that vision so believers could be
enlightened about Satan's wiles and strategies and not
get off into error.
   Believers have been ignorant of Satan's devices, so
he has been able to take advantage of them. But the
Spirit of God wants believers to get the wisdom and
revelation of the knowledge of Jesus and His Word so
the eyes of their understanding will be enlightened to
know their authority in Christ.
    God wants believers to know they are no longer
subject to Satan because they have been delivered from
his dominion and authority (Col. 1:13). God wants the
Body of Christ to know that we aren't a defeated
Church—we are a triumphant Church. We are to reign
in life through Jesus Christ because we have a position
of authority over the devil. When the eyes of our
understanding are enlightened, we can stand in our
place of authority as the triumphant Church upon the
earth.

                Jesus' Authority
    When Jesus began His public ministry, He came
into contact immediately with demonic forces and evil
spirits. Demons and evil spirits had wrought evil
unhindered down through the ages. Satan and his hosts
had reigned as kings in the spirit realm and held men
in the bondage of spiritual death. No one had authority
to dethrone Satan and his hosts or to rule over them or
to even challenge their authority or rulership upon the

                         215
                The Triumphant Church


earth.
    For example, in the Old Testament, we don't see
people casting evil spirits out of anyone or taking
authority over the devil because under the Old
Covenant no one had any authority over the devil or evil
spirits. But when Jesus came on the scene in His earth
walk, it was different. Evil spirits and man instantly
recognized Jesus' authority as He walked upon this
earth.
   MARK 1:21-24
   21 And they [Jesus and His disciples] went into
   Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath
   day he entered into the synagogue, and taught.
   22 And they were astonished at his doctrine
   [teaching]: FOR HE TAUGHT THEM AS ONE
   THAT HAD AUTHORITY, and not as the scribes.
   23 And there was in their synagogue a man with
   an UNCLEAN SPIRIT; and he cried out,
   24 Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with
   thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to
   destroy us? I KNOW THEE WHO THOU ART, the
   Holy One of God."

   Throughout the New Testament, we see that
demons and evil spirits instantly recognized and knew
Jesus. Here in Mark, the unclean spirit in this man not
only knew who Jesus was, but he also recognized Jesus'
authority.
    Even the scribes, Pharisees, and the people in the
synagogue recognized Jesus' authority. They marveled
and were astonished because Jesus taught with
authority, not as the scribes taught. Both men and
demons recognized Jesus' authority and bowed before
it.
   Demons feared Jesus because He proved Himself to

                          216
                   The Wisdom of God


be the Master over the devil. Even in the first recorded
encounter Jesus had with the devil, Jesus proved
Himself to be triumphant over Satan.

             Jesus' Defeat of Satan
   The first recorded encounter Jesus had with the
devil occurred after Jesus was baptized by John in the
Jordan River. Right after Jesus was baptized, the
Scripture says, "Then was Jesus led up OF THE [Holy]
SPIRIT into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil"
(Matt. 4:1). Many times people have the idea that the
Holy Spirit only leads us into good, easy places, where
the going is never hard. But that's not always true. As
we grow and mature in Christ, we find out that
sometimes it's in the hard places where we grow the
most in God.
    Jesus was led by the Spirit of God into the
wilderness to be tempted by the devil. But, thank God,
even in His temptation, Jesus proved Himself to be
Master over the devil. Jesus overcame Satan in this
encounter with the Word of God. Three times Jesus
overcame Satan with the words, "It is written" (Matt.
4:4,7,10; Luke 4:4,8,12). Jesus didn't do "battle" with
Satan; He simply stood His ground and overcame Satan
with the Word alone.
   In Jesus' earth walk, from the day of His temptation
when He was led by the Spirit in the wilderness to be
tempted of the devil, until the day Jesus willingly
surrendered Himself to the will of God on the Cross—
He defeated Satan in every encounter.
    Jesus' complete and total victory over Satan is
clearly shown throughout the Word of God.
   HEBREWS 2:14


                          217
                 The Triumphant Church

   14 Forasmuch then as the children are
   partakers of flesh and blood, he [Jesus] also
   himself likewise took part of the same; that
   through death he might DESTROY HIM THAT
   HAD THE POWER OF DEATH [spiritual death],
   that is, THE DEVIL.

   HEBREWS 2:14 (American Standard Version)
   14 Since then the children are SHARERS in
   flesh and blood, he also himself in like manner
   partook of the same; that through death HE
   MIGHT BRING TO NOUGHT HIM THAT HAD
   THE POWER OF DEATH, that is, the devil.

    The King James Version of the Bible says that Jesus
"destroyed" Satan who had the power of death—
spiritual death or separation from God. That doesn't
mean Jesus destroyed Satan in the sense that Satan
ceased to exist. The meaning is a little clearer in the
American Standard Version. It says Jesus put Satan "to
nought." In other words, Jesus conquered Satan and
stripped him of his power and authority.
   When Hebrews 2:14 says Jesus destroyed Satan who
had the power of death, the Bible is not talking about
physical death. Physical death will eventually be put
underfoot (1 Cor. 15:54), but until it is, people still die
physically.
    There are three kinds of death referred to in the
Bible. First, spiritual death (John 5:24; Eph. 2:1) or
separation from God. Second, the Bible talks about
physical death (Phil. 1:20,21). Third, the Bible refers to
the second death which is eternal separation from God
and being eternally cast into the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone (Rev. 20:13-15).
   Hebrews 2:14 is talking about spiritual death. It's
saying that Jesus destroyed the authority of Satan who


                           218
                   The Wisdom of God


had power over spiritual death or eternal separation
from God. Those who accept Jesus Christ as their Lord
and Savior never have to fear "the lord of death" and
being eternally separated from God.
     Looking at Hebrews 2:14 in other translations sheds
more light on Jesus' triumph over Satan. For example,
Moffatt's translation says, "... by dying HE MIGHT
CRUSH HIM WHO WIELDS THE POWER OF DEATH
... the devil...."
   Conybeare's translation says that Jesus destroyed
the authority of the "lord of death" and allowed us to be
partakers of Jesus' victory over him. The American
Standard Version says we are sharers in Jesus' victory
over the devil.
    We are not only partakers, but we are sharers in
Jesus' victory over Satan. That means we are sharers in
the resurrection power of God. And now God is asking
us to share with Him in giving the world the message of
Jesus' victory so those in bondage to Satan can be
delivered from his captivity.
   Another passage in the Book of Revelation not only
shows us Jesus' complete defeat of Satan, the lord of
death, but it shows us that Jesus took the keys of death
and hell from the devil. Death and hell are no longer
under Satan's jurisdiction.
   REVELATION 1:17,18 (American Standard
   Version)
   17 And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as one
   dead. And he laid his right hand upon me,
   saying, Fear not; I am the first and the last,
   18 And the Living One; and I was dead, and
   behold, I am alive for evermore, and I HAVE
   THE KEYS OF DEATH [spiritual death] and of
   HADES [Hell].


                          219
                 The Triumphant Church


   When Jesus conquered Satan in His death, burial,
and resurrection, He stripped from Satan all his
authority over spiritual death. Jesus now has “... the
keys of hell and of [spiritual] death" (Rev. 1:18).
    In other words, everyone who accepts Jesus Christ
as his Lord and Savior is redeemed from the dominion
of Satan who had the power of spiritual death.
Believers are redeemed from spiritual death itself and
aren't separated from God when they die. They will
forever be with God (2 Cor. 5:6,8).
   We can also see the victory of Jesus over Satan in
Colossians 2:15.
   COLOSSIANS 2:15
   15 And having spoiled principalities and
   powers, he made a shew of them openly,
   TRIUMPHING OVER THEM in it [the Cross].

   The phrase "having spoiled principalities and
power" is a little blind to us. Of course, the
principalities and powers that Jesus "spoiled" refer to
satanic beings. Let's look at some other translations of
Colossians 2:15 to get a better understanding of what
Jesus did when He spoiled these principalities and
powers.
   COLOSSIANS 2:15 (Conybeare)
   15 ... He [Jesus] DISARMED the Principalities
   and the Powers [which fought against Him]....

   COLOSSIANS 2:15 (Phillips)
   15 ... he [Jesus] EXPOSED THEM, SHATTERED,
   EMPTY and DEFEATED, in his final glorious
   triumphant act!

   Colossians 2:15 tells us that Satan and his evil hosts
were spoiled, disarmed, stripped of their power,
exposed, shattered, emptied and defeated by our Lord

                          220
                   The Wisdom of God


Jesus Christ. And Jesus made an open example of their
complete defeat. This verse also shows us Satan's
eternal defeat.
    When we understand how the word "spoiled" was
used in biblical times, it gives us a clearer picture of
Jesus' complete victory over the powers of darkness
when He was raised from the dead. In Bible days, when
one king fought against another king and defeated him
in battle, it was said that the defeated king was
“spoiled.” The victor would parade the captured king
and other important prisoners through the town as a
trophy of triumph. The victors would make a show of
the enemy's defeat, openly displaying their complete
downfall publicly before everyone.
   The Bible says Jesus did that to Satan. Jesus
"spoiled" Satan, displaying His triumph and Satan's
defeat before three worlds: Heaven, earth, and hell
(Phil. 2:9,10). He disarmed and stripped Satan of his
authority and took the keys of death and hell from him
(Rev. 1:18), thereby stripping from Satan his authority
over spiritual death—eternal separation from God.
    Another translation of Colossians 2:15 reads,
"Having put to nought principalities and powers, He
made a show of them openly triumphing over them in
the Cross."
   To "put to nought" means to reduce to nothing! Jesus
reduced principalities and powers to nothing. He
completely stripped them of their authority. First John
3:8 says, “... For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might DESTROY [put to nought
and reduce to nothing] the works of the devil.” The
reason Jesus came to this earth was to put to nought
the works of the devil and reduce him to nothing!



                          221
                 The Triumphant Church


                Dethroned Powers
   The Body of Christ needs the eyes of their
understanding enlightened to understand Jesus'
complete defeat of Satan. This is the wisdom of God
that God wants each believer to understand.
   1 CORINTHIANS 2:6,7
   6 Howbeit we speak WISDOM among them that
   are PERFECT [mature]: yet not the wisdom of
   this world, nor of THE PRINCES OF THIS
   WORLD, that come to nought:
   7 But we speak THE WISDOM OF GOD....

   Don't let the word "perfect" in verse 6 throw you.
Another word for "perfect" is full grown or mature. No
one is perfect in the flesh, but God does expect us to
mature and grow up spiritually.
   1 CORINTHIANS 2:6,7 (Moffatt)
   6 We do discuss 'wisdom' with those who are
   MATURE; only it is not the wisdom of this world
   or of the DETHRONED POWERS who rule this
   world,
   7 It is the mysterious WISDOM OF GOD that we
   discuss, that hidden wisdom which God decreed
   from all eternity for our glory.

    Verse 6 tells us that Satan has been dethroned. The
wisdom of the mature or full-grown Christian whose
understanding has been enlightened by the Holy Spirit
is that Satan has already been dethroned and the
believer has victory over him in Christ. Let that sink in!
   Satan and all of his demon forces are dethroned.
"Dethroned" is defined as to remove from a throne or
place of prominence: deposed. The word "deposed"
means to remove from office, position, or authority,
especially high office.

                           222
                   The Wisdom of God


    Satan has been dethroned by Jesus Christ at the
Cross of Calvary and in His resurrection. Satan has
been removed from his throne, his place of prominence,
his place of authority—and from his high office. Jesus
already did that for every believer.
    Satan has no authority over the believer, unless the
believer gives him access or authority through lack of
knowledge of God's Word, disobedience, or failure to
exercise his rights in Christ.
    The fact that Satan has been dethroned and
stripped of his authority is the wisdom the Holy Spirit
is trying to get across to the Body of Christ—the
triumphant Church—in these Spirit-inspired prayers in
the Book of Ephesians.
   The wisdom of God is that believers only need to
stand in Jesus' victory over the devil because they are
in Christ. Jesus' victory over the devil is their victory.
That's why believers don't need to make war on an
enemy that is already defeated.
   The wisdom of God—Bible wisdom—is that Satan is
a defeated foe. But that's not the wisdom of the world.
Satan, the god of this world, doesn't want people to
know that.
    The wisdom of the god of this world is that believers
still have to struggle and war against the hosts of
darkness in an effort to try to defeat and overcome
them.
    Satan wants believers to spend their time trying to
fight a "war" that has already been fought and won by
Jesus because the devil knows that is a waste of their
time.
   Of course Satan still wields power over unsaved
people in the world because they don't know he's been

                           223
                 The Triumphant Church


dethroned. Satan's "wisdom" is that he still rules and
reigns in the affairs of men.
   Satan has even blinded the minds of some
Christians so they believe that too. That's why believers
need to get the eyes of their understanding enlightened
—to see the truth and power of the finished work of the
Cross.

     The Seating and Reigning of Christ
    After Jesus was raised from the dead, the Bible says
God highly exalted Him to a position of honor at the
right hand of God the Father and gave Him a Name
which is above every name.
   PHILIPPIANS 2:9-11
   9 Wherefore GOD also HATH HIGHLY EXALTED
   HIM [Jesus], and given him a name which is
   ABOVE every name:
   10 That at the name of Jesus every knee should
   bow, of THINGS [beings] IN Heaven, and
   THINGS [beings] IN EARTH, and THINGS
   [beings] UNDER THE EARTH;
   11 And that EVERY TONGUE should confess
   that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
   Father.

   EPHESIANS 1:19-22
   19 And what is the exceeding greatness of his
   power....
   20 Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised
   him from the dead, and SET HIM AT HIS OWN
   RIGHT HAND IN THE HEAVENLY PLACES,
   21 FAR ABOVE ALL PRINCIPALITY, and
   POWER, and MIGHT, and DOMINION, and
   EVERY NAME THAT IS NAMED, not only in this
   world, but also in that which is to come.


                          224
                  The Wisdom of God

   22 And hath put all things under his feet, and
   gave him to be THE HEAD OVER ALL THINGS
   to the church.

    God not only gave Jesus a Name which is above
every name, but at the Name of Jesus every being in all
three worlds—Heaven, earth, and hell—must bow and
confess Jesus' Lordship and dominion. God also seated
Jesus in the highest position in the universe, at His
own right hand, and made Him head over all things
(v.22).
    These verses don't say, "God raised Jesus from the
dead and set Him above all principality, power, might,
and dominion." They say that God set Jesus "far above"
all principality, power, might, dominion, and every
name that is named.

            Your Position in Christ
   How does Jesus' seating in the highest position in
the universe affect you, the believer? What is your
position because you're in Christ?
   EPHESIANS 2:1,2,4-6
   1 And you hath he quickened [made alive], who
   were dead [spiritually dead] in trespasses and
   sins;
   2 Wherein in time past ye walked according to
   the course of this world, according to the prince
   of the power of the air [the dethroned powers],
   the spirit that now worketh in the children of
   disobedience:...
   4 But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great
   love wherewith he loved us,
   5 Even when we were dead in sins, HATH
   QUICKENED US TOGETHER WITH CHRIST,
   (by grace ye are saved;)


                         225
                 The Triumphant Church

   6 And HATH RAISED US UP TOGETHER, and
   MADE US SIT TOGETHER IN HEAVENLY
   PLACES IN CHRIST JESUS.

   According to Ephesians 2:6, believers are seated
with Christ in heavenly places. Joint-seating with
Christ is "far above" all principalities and powers of
darkness. Evil spirits can't influence the believer who
has joint-seating with Christ far above all principality
and power!
   Our seating and reigning with Christ in heavenly
places is a position of authority, honor, and triumph—
not failure, depression, and defeat.
   As a believer, your seating with Christ is part of
your inheritance now. This is where you are already
seated because when Jesus was seated in triumph, you
were seated with Him.
    The word "hath" in verse 6 is past tense: God has
already raised you up together and made you sit in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus in a position of honor
and triumph. You rule and reign with Christ in this life
now—if you'll just exercise your rightful authority.
   Therefore, your position in Christ far above
principalities  and    powers   has    already   been
accomplished. But you need to exercise the authority
that belongs to you in that position of reigning with
Christ over principalities and powers before it will
profit you.
    Our position as believers is one of joint-seating with
Christ in heavenly places. That may not always be our
circumstance, but that is our position.
   If you want to rise above your circumstances, take
advantage of your position in Christ.
   Look at this passage in Weymouth's translation.

                           226
                   The Wisdom of God

   EPHESIANS 2:4-6 (Weymouth)
   4 But God, being rich in mercy, because of the
   intense love which He bestowed on us,
   5 Caused us, dead though we were through our
   offences, TO LIVE WITH CHRIST—it is by grace
   that you have been saved—
   6 RAISED US WITH HIM from the dead, and
   ENTHRONED       US    WITH   HIM      IN  THE
   HEAVENLY REALMS as being IN CHRIST
   JESUS.

   God enthroned us with Jesus in the heavenly
realms. Does that sound like a Church that's defeated
and is still having to do battle to gain mastery over
Satan? No, God designed the Church of the Lord Jesus
Christ to be triumphant because we are sharers and
partakers of Christ's victory over Satan.
   Because the believer is in Christ, when Christ sat
down, the believer sat down with Him far above
principalities and powers. The Church, the Body of
Christ, is in Christ. The body is connected to the head.
Jesus is the Head of His Body—the Church.
    If Jesus the Head triumphed over the devil, is the
Body of Christ to be any less triumphant since we are
in Christ? Of course not! It is our legal right to enjoy
joint-seating with Christ in heavenly places in a
position of authority and triumph far above all
principalities and powers. If you will take advantage of
your joint-seating with Christ, you will begin to
triumph in life!
   Believers don't have to try to be seated far above
principalities and powers with Christ. They don't have
to pray through to be seated with Christ in heavenly
places. They don't have to struggle through to attain
that position, or fight through demons to be seated in a


                          227
                 The Triumphant Church


place of victory with Christ.
    The believer's position and seating in Christ is a
fact. It has already happened. That position was
attained for us through our Lord Jesus Christ. Now all
we have to do is enjoy the rights and privileges that
already belong to us as joint-heirs with Christ.
   In these Spirit-anointed prayers, the Holy Spirit is
endeavoring to get across to the Body of Christ that
their joint-seating with Christ far above the realms of
darkness is their legal inheritance.
    But believers won't be able to take advantage of
what rightfully belongs to them in their inheritance in
Christ unless the eyes of their understanding are
enlightened to see what they really possess in this life.
We can't possess what we don't know belongs to us.
   When believers get the revelation of their position in
Christ, what a difference it will make in their lives.
They will no longer be the defeated Church. They will
take their place as the triumphant Church, which was
God's design from the foundation of the world.
    The unredeemed thinking of so many believers is
that they are helpless against the devil and are always
subject to defeat and failure: "The devil is after me all
the time." "The devil is going to get me!" "We don't have
much in this life, but when we all get to Heaven, what a
glorious future awaits us."
    Yes, believers have a glorious future to look forward
to because they will forever be with the Lord. But the
Holy Spirit wants believers to know the glorious present
they possess right now because of their position in
Christ! Believers need to take advantage of what
belongs to them in Christ.
   Because of our position in Christ, God is the

                           228
                   The Wisdom of God


strength of our life. The psalmist asks the question, "Of
whom shall I be afraid?" (Ps. 27:1). We don't have to be
afraid of anything, including Satan, demons, or evil
spirits because of Jesus' victory at the Cross.
   ROMANS 8:37-39
   37 Nay, in all these things WE ARE MORE THAN
   CONQUERORS THROUGH HIM THAT LOVED
   US.
   38 For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor
   life, nor ANGELS, nor PRINCIPALITIES, nor
   POWERS, nor things present, nor things to
   come,
   39 Nor height, nor depth, NOR ANY OTHER
   CREATURE [Satan or evil spirits], shall be able
   to separate us from the love of God, which is in
   Christ Jesus our Lord.

   The Body of Christ—the triumphant Church—is
more than a conqueror over all the power of the enemy
because we're in Christ (Luke 10:19; Rom. 8:37).
Perhaps believers have sung too much the song, "Oh,
Lord, just keep me near the Cross."
   No, you don't want to stay at the Cross. You want to
come on up to the throne and sit in your rightful
position as a joint-heir with Christ in heavenly places
(Eph. 2:6; Gal. 4:7; Rom. 8:17). You want to take your
place of authority far above principalities and powers so
you can rule and reign in life with Christ.
   Come by the way of the Cross, but don't stay there.
Come on to Pentecost and get filled with the Holy
Spirit. But don't stop there either. Come on to the
throne where you are seated in Christ and take your
authority in Christ. It's a position of authority, not
because of who you are, but because of who He is.
   Is the Body of Christ seated in heavenly places far


                          229
                 The Triumphant Church


above principalities and dominions in the power of their
own strength? No! We are seated in heavenly places in
the power of God's might (Eph. 1:20-22; 6:10).
   Look at Ephesians 1:22 in the American Standard
Version. I Want you to see a truth in this verse.
   EPHESIANS 1:22 (American Standard
   Version)
   22 And he put ALL THINGS IN SUBJECTION
   UNDER HIS [Jesus'] FEET, and gave him to be
   head over all things to the church.

    This scripture is saying that all things—whether it's
Satan, principalities, powers, thrones, or dominions—
they are all under subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ.
And because we are in Christ, evil spirits are subject to
us in Jesus' Name.
    How many things did God put under Jesus' feet? All
things! That includes Satan, demons, evil spirits, sin,
sickness, poverty, and disease. We are Christ's body on
the earth, so that means all things have been put under
our feet too.
    Is God going to put all things under Jesus' feet and
therefore under our feet? No, that's future tense. God
"hath put all things under his feet" (1 Cor. 15:27; Eph.
1:22). That's past tense. Satan is already under Jesus'
feet, so he's under our feet, too, because we're in Christ.
   If Satan is under our feet that means he has no
authority over us—we have authority over him. Is that
something the believer has to try to attain to? No, it's
an accomplished fact because of the believer's joint-
seating with Christ.
   If believers really understood what that means,
Satan would never be able to lord it over them again.
And if this truth ever dawns on the Church, they will

                           230
                  The Wisdom of God


take their rightful place in Christ as the triumphant
Church, reigning as kings in life.
   You see, our joint-seating and ruling with Christ is
the climax of the redemptive work of Christ. After the
resurrection, Jesus was exalted to the highest seat in
the universe. He was given all dominion, all authority,
and all power. Not only that, but all dominion,
authority, and power was put beneath Jesus' feet,
which means it's under our feet since we're the Body of
Christ.
    That's why Satan can't rule over you unless you
allow him to through ignorance of your rights and
privileges in Christ or you open the door to him. Too
many times, believers just open the door and invite
Satan to come in.
   Another scripture shows us the authority we have
because Satan is under our feet.
   LUKE 10:19
   19 Behold, I give unto you power [authority] TO
   TREAD ON SERPENTS and SCORPIONS, and
   over ALL THE POWER OF THE ENEMY: and
   nothing shall by any means hurt you.

    In Luke 10:19, Jesus used the terms "scorpions" and
"serpents" figuratively as a type of the enemy's power.
He was talking about Satan and all his host of demons
and evil spirits. We know this because Jesus said, "I
give you power or authority over all the power of the
enemy."
   Jesus was saying that no power of the enemy—no
principality, power, ruler of darkness, nor spiritual
wickedness in high places—can hurt us as we take our
stand of authority in Christ. We can tread upon Satan
and his hosts because he's under our feet.


                         231
                 The Triumphant Church


   Looking at Luke 10:19, there are two different
Greek words translated as "power." The first word for
"power" is exousia or authority. The second word for
"power" is dunamis which means strength or ability.
    Actually a better translation of this verse would be
"I give you authority over all the power of the enemy."
Translated as "power," people think, "That means I
have power." Then they realize, "But I don't feel any
power."
    You don't have any power in yourself, but you do
have authority in Christ. That's different. In themselves
believers don't have any power over the devil, but they
do have authority over the devil.
    Our authority in Christ is like a policeman's
authority when he stands out in the street to direct
traffic. He doesn't have any power or personal strength
to hold back those cars; he doesn't have that kind of
ability. But he does have that kind of authority, and
people recognize that authority and honor it.
   So Jesus was actually saying in Luke 10:19, "I give
you authority to tread upon devils, demons, evil spirits
and over all the power of the enemy. And because of the
authority in My Name, none of the power of the enemy
can harm you."
    God Himself is the force and power behind your
authority in Christ. The believer who is fully conscious
of the divine power behind him and of his authority in
Christ can face the enemy without fear or hesitancy.

        The Wisdom of Being in Christ
   Now go back and read First Corinthians 2:6, and
you will understand the wisdom of God more clearly.



                          232
                   The Wisdom of God

   1 CORINTHIANS 2:6,7 (Moffatt)
   6 We do discuss 'wisdom' WITH THOSE WHO
   ARE MATURE; only it is NOT the wisdom of this
   world or of the DETHRONED POWERS who rule
   this world,
   7 It is the mysterious WISDOM OF GOD that we
   discuss, that hidden wisdom which God decreed
   from all eternity for our glory.

    What is the wisdom of God that those who are
spiritually mature in the Word will see and
understand? It is knowledge of the inheritance that God
has already prepared for them in Christ; it is the
wisdom of knowing who they are in Christ. The wisdom
of God is that believers only need to stand against
demons in the finished work of the Cross—in the
victory that Jesus Christ already won for them.
    If believers would begin to stand in their position of
authority in Christ against a foe that has already been
defeated and dethroned, it would solve so many of their
problems.
    Many well-meaning believers have fallen into the
error of thinking they have to do something to overcome
the devil. They seem to think that somehow they have
to "fight" the devil and conquer him.
    According to First Corinthians 2:6, one reason
believers have fallen into this error is that they aren't
mature in the Word: "We speak the wisdom of God to
those who are mature."
    People who are wrestling against the devil in their
own strength, always trying to defeat a "dethroned
power," are not yet mature or full grown in the Word. I
didn't say that—the Bible said that: " . . . we speak
wisdom among them THAT ARE PERFECT [mature or
full grown]: yet not the wisdom of this world.... But we


                           233
                The Triumphant Church


speak THE WISDOM OF GOD . . . " ( 1 Cor. 2:6,7).
    The wisdom of God is the wisdom of His Word. Your
mind will have to be renewed to the wisdom of God—
the wisdom of God's Word—to see what Jesus has
already wrought for you in your redemption. That's
what will make you mature in your knowledge of being
in Christ.
    When believers have the eyes of their understanding
enlightened, they will understand exactly how complete
the plan of redemption really is. Those who are still
waging war on the devil haven't had the eyes of their
understanding enlightened to see the wisdom of God.
But when you are mature in the Word and have the
wisdom of God—Bible wisdom—you know Satan and
his hosts are already conquered, defeated, dethroned,
and deprived of their power and that you are the
triumphant one in Christ.
    But you will have to stand your ground with the
Word of God against Satan because his wiles are
deceptive, and he will try to blind your eyes to make
you think he has power and authority over you. He will
always try to get you out of the realm of faith in God's
Word by making you doubt the Word, doubt God, and
doubt what God has told you. That's why the fight
against him is in the arena of faith—faith in God and
faith in God's Word—not in trying to defeat an enemy
who is already defeated.
    One reason many believers are having so much
trouble with the devil is that they are always trying to
do something themselves about the devil, instead of
acting on what the Word says Jesus already did about
the devil. That means they aren't doers of the Word.
They say, "Let's declare war on the devil!" and they try
to carry out some kind of combat against him.

                          234
                    The Wisdom of God


    But when you understand that Satan is dethroned,
you know war has already been declared on the devil,
and the victory has been won by the Lord Jesus Christ.
Jesus Christ arose the Victor! So just take your position
of joint-seating with Christ in His victory over the devil.
    If Satan and his cohorts have been dethroned, then
why are the hosts of darkness ruling over so many
believers? Either believers don't know their authority in
Christ, or they aren't exercising their authority in
Christ.
   Satan will keep on ruling people in the world who
aren't saved, of course, because they don't know any
better. But if believers will preach the gospel to
unsaved folks, they'll get saved and come out from
under Satan's dominion.
   The Church is to preach the good news to every
creature and tell them that they don't have to be
dominated by the devil anymore. That's how we are to
"wage war" on the devil! When people get ahold of the
good news in Christ and are born again, Satan won't be
able to rule over them anymore. That is how believers
are to put Satan's kingdom to nought and reduce it to
nothing.

     The Authority in the Name of Jesus
    The key to our glorious inheritance and our
authority over the Powers of darkness is the Name of
Jesus. Believers have authority over the devil in the
Name of Jesus, not in themselves. But I think even Full
Gospel folks have almost thought the Name of Jesus is
just to be used like a magic charm one wears to ward off
evil forces or something. Believers haven't really
understood what they possess in their inheritance


                           235
                 The Triumphant Church


because of that Name.
   All the power and authority Jesus has is invested in
His Name Believers have been authorized to use His
Name (John 14:13,14).
   We know we've been authorized to use the Name of
Jesus in prayer because Jesus said, “... Whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father IN MY NAME, He will give it you”
(John 16:23).
    Praying according to the Word of God is one way
believers take their place of authority in Christ on the
earth.
    But Jesus also said to the believer, “... In my name
shall they [believers] cast out devils ...” (Mark 16:17).
Therefore, we have authority over the devil in the Name
of Jesus.
   PHILIPPIANS 2:9,10
   9 Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him,
   and GIVEN HIM A NAME which IS ABOVE
   EVERY NAME:
   10 That at THE NAME OF JESUS every knee
   should bow, of things [beings] in heaven, and
   things [beings] in EARTH, and things [beings]
   UNDER THE EARTH.

   The Name of Jesus has authority in three realms:
Heaven, earth, and hell. The devil recognizes the
authority of Jesus' Name; he knows he has to bow to
that Name. And the devil also recognizes the authority
you have in Christ because of that Name. But you must
recognize your authority and exercise it and take a
stand against the devil in Jesus' Name.

    Blessed With All Spiritual Blessings
                 in Christ

                          236
                    The Wisdom of God


    This authority over the devil is the true possession
of every child of God. It belongs to every one of us and it
is one of the spiritual blessings of our inheritance as
saints in Christ.
   EPHESIANS 1:3
   3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
   Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with ALL
   SPIRITUAL BLESSINGS in heavenly places in
   Christ.

    In Jesus' redemption, everything Jesus wrought—
everything He bought and secured in His victory over
Satan—He did for the Body of Christ—you. Jesus'
triumph and victory belongs to every single believer.
    Because we are blessed with all spiritual blessings,
that would certainly include triumph and authority
over Satan, otherwise it wouldn't be all spiritual
blessings.
    The American Standard Version says, "Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath
blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly
places in Christ." That includes your victory in Christ
over Satan and all his evil hosts.
    In other words, in Christ, every single spiritual
blessing belongs to you now. You don't have to work or
struggle or fight demons to attain to all spiritual
blessings; they are already yours as you appropriate
them by faith in the Word and exercise what rightfully
belongs to you. But all spiritual blessings are only ours
because we are in Him.
    You hear some people say, "But So-and-so seems to
get more blessings than I do." We look at certain people
and think they are especially blessed of God. But you
won't find that in Scripture anywhere; God has no


                           237
                 The Triumphant Church


favorites.
   People who enjoy the blessings of God, including
their rightful authority over the devil, just know how to
take advantage of what belongs to them to a greater
degree than those who don't appropriate the blessings
of God. If you don't know about your inheritance and
authority in Christ, you will not be able to partake of
what is rightfully yours.
    Every one of us in the Body of Christ is blessed with
all or every spiritual blessing in Christ, so no one has a
corner on the authority we possess over the devil in
Jesus' Name. The least member in the Body of Christ
can be fearless in the face of demons, devils, and evil
spirits because of who he is in Christ. No one is blessed
with any more spiritual blessings than anyone else in
the Body of Christ.
    It's to be regretted that every member of the Body of
Christ doesn't take advantage of what belongs to him,
because his authority over the devil belongs to him
whether he knows about it or not. But a person can't
take advantage of something he doesn't know about or
exercise.

    Only the Truth Acted Upon Sets You
                   Free
    The eyes of your understanding need to be
enlightened so you can know and exercise your authority
in Christ before it will benefit you. In other words, you
can know what is yours, but not act upon it. You can
know what the Word says, but not be a doer of the
Word.
    Any blessing, right, privilege, or authority can
belong to you, but if you don't know about it, you won't


                           238
                   The Wisdom of God


act on it. Or if you don't act on what you know and
exercise and appropriate what has been given to you, it
won't benefit you. It won't become a reality to you even
though it's your legal possession.
   That's why you need to know what belongs to you in
Christ. But just knowledge of what belongs to you isn't
enough. It's knowledge acted upon that brings results.
   The devil doesn't want the people of God to find out
the authority that actually belongs to them in Christ.
This is one way Satan tries to defeat the child of God.
He knows when the child of God finds out his legal,
lawful authority in Christ, he will enjoy victory over
him.
    That's why Satan tries to obscure this knowledge
and blind people's eyes and understanding and keep
this vital knowledge from them. But when the child of
God knows the truth and acts on that knowledge, he
can no longer be dominated by the devil.
   JOHN 8:32
   32 And ye shall know the truth [the Word], and
   THE TRUTH [the Word] SHALL MAKE YOU
   FREE.

   You have to know the truth before the truth can
make you free. That's what this verse is saying. Then
once you know the truth of God's Word about who you
are in Christ, it's acting on the truth you know that
makes you free.
    That's so important, I'm going to say it a little
differently so you can grasp the meaning:
   You must know the Word before the Word can make
you free.
   Then you have to act on the Word you know.


                          239
                 The Triumphant Church


   The Word you know that you act on makes you free.
    When you act on the Word you know, you will enjoy
victory over satanic forces in every circumstance of life.
   2 CORINTHIANS 2:14
   14 Now thanks be unto God, which ALWAYS
   CAUSETH US TO TRIUMPH in Christ, and
   maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by
   us in every place.

    God promised us the victory in every circumstance
of life, so tests and trials don't have to overcome you.
The Bible didn't say, "Thanks be to God, who causes you
to triumph once in a while over Satan and
circumstances." Because Jesus triumphed over all of
those satanic forces—His triumph is your triumph
because you are in Him.
   2 CORINTHIANS 2:14 (Conybeare)
   14 But thanks be to God who leads me on from
   place to place in the train of His triumph, TO
   CELEBRATE HIS VICTORY OVER THE
   ENEMIES OF CHRIST [demons].

    In the face of these facts, what should our attitude
be toward the devil and his works? One of cowering in
fear at the devil? No! We are more than conquerors
through Him who loved us (Rom. 8:37).
   As the Body of Christ, we are taking Jesus' place on
the earth. Jesus is the Head and we are His Body. We
are acting for Jesus on this earth in the affairs of life.
Jesus is the Destroyer of the adversary's authority, and
we are to enforce that defeat on this earth.

   Satan Shall Not Have Dominion Over
                Believers


                           240
                   The Wisdom of God


   We are talking about the riches of our inheritance in
Christ. The Bible says we have been translated out of
the kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of God's
dear Son (Col. 1:13). Therefore, our inheritance includes
the fact that the works of darkness have no legal
authority or dominion over us.
   Paul wrote to the believers at Rome, saying, "For
sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not
under the law, but under grace" (Rom. 6:14). In a sense,
sin and Satan are synonymous terms. Therefore, we
could read this verse, "Satan shall not have dominion
over you."
   Another translation reads, "Sin shall not lord it over
you." You could read it: "Satan shall not lord it over
you."
   Why can't Satan lord it over believers? Because he's
not our lord, and he's been put under our feet! Jesus is
our Lord and the Head of the Church, not Satan.
    Jesus is the only One who is to have dominion over
us! He is the One who rules us, not only corporately as
the Body of Christ, but individually as well.
    For example, if symptoms of distress and deficiency
of any kind from the enemy try to attack my body or
mind, I just say, "Oh, no you don't, Satan. You can't put
that on me. Jesus has dominion over you. Jesus is My
Healer and My Deliverer. He is not the destroyer.
    "Jesus is the Life-Giver, and He is my Lord. Satan,
you are not my lord, and you can't triumph over me. I
refuse to accept or permit anything that belongs to you.
You can't bring me depression, oppression, sickness, or
disease. I refuse to permit it in Jesus' Name."
   When I take my stand against Satan in Jesus' Name
using my rightful authority, the enemy can't bring me

                          241
                 The Triumphant Church


any of his evil works. When I am a doer of the Word,
Satan can't, he doesn't, and he won't be able to defeat
me because Jesus' Lordship over me is declared in the
Word, and I stand upon my rights and privileges in
Christ. Jesus' dominion over me is real, and I submit
only to Him as my Lord.
    That is acting on the truth, and it will make you
free.

     The Shadow of the Valley of Death
   Once we understand that we have been delivered
out of Satan's control and we are no longer under the
dominion of Satan or spiritual death, we can
understand more clearly what Psalm 23 is saying to us.
   PSALM 23:1,4-6
   1 The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want....
   4 Yea, though I walk through THE VALLEY OF
   THE SHADOW OF DEATH, I will fear no evil: for
   thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they
   comfort me.
   5 THOU PREPAREST A TABLE BEFORE ME IN
   THE PRESENCE OF MINE ENEMIES: thou
   anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth
   over.
   6 Surely GOODNESS and MERCY shall follow
   me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the
   house of the Lord for ever.

    There is a truth in Psalm 23 that the Body of Christ
has failed to receive and appropriate for their lives. You
understand, of course, that many of the psalms are
prophetic or Messianic. But we are living in Psalm 23
right now.
   Psalm 23 says, "Yea, though I walk through the


                           242
                     The Wisdom of God


valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil. . . " ( v .
4). This Psalm is quoted all the time at funerals, but
actually this is referring to Satan's domain here on
earth, and it is referring to spiritual death, not physical
death.
    You and I are walking through the valley of the
shadow of death in this life because Satan is the god of
this world. Spiritual death and its effects are on every
side. Sin, sickness, disease, poverty, and everything else
that Satan brings surround us in this life.
    But Jesus declared that we are in the world, but not
of the world (John 17:16,18). That correlates with a
valuable truth we find in Psalm 23:5: "Thou preparest a
table before me in the presence of mine enemies...."
    Who are our enemies? The devil himself is certainly
our enemy; the Bible calls him our adversary (1 Peter
5:8). Evil spirits, demons, sickness, disease, and poverty
are all our enemies. Anything that would bind or hinder
us is our enemy.

              The Table of Provision
    In Psalm 23 God is telling us that right in the midst
of Satan's domain where the devil is ruling over those in
darkness as the god of this world and where the effects
of spiritual death are all around us—God prepares a
table for us in the very presence of those enemies!
    Yes, demons, devils, and evil spirits are here and we
sometimes feel their presence and their effect. But even
so, God prepares a table for us right in the midst of
them!
   Why does God prepare a table for us in the presence
of our enemies? Why don't we just get rid of our
enemies? We can't. As I've said, they have a right to be

                             243
                 The Triumphant Church


here, and they are going to stay here until Adam's lease
on this earth runs out. That's why it is so important for
believers to stand in their victory and partake of the
table of the Lord's provision, because those evil spirits
will be here to try to hinder us, tempt us, and keep us
from receiving God's best in life.
   But right in the presence of our enemies—demons
and evil spirits—God has prepared a table of abundant
provision—the riches of the glory of His inheritance in
the saints—for every believer in the Body of Christ!
   The reason many Christians are defeated in life is
that even though they are seated with Christ in
heavenly places at the table of the Lord's provision,
they aren't appropriating what belongs to them at that
table. All the riches of being in Christ are included at
the table of the Lord's provision.
    Many believers are not even looking at the
provisions God has made for them in the Word. Instead
of looking at their rights and privileges in Christ,
including their authority over the devil, they are
looking at the enemy. Their focus in life is on the devil
and his works, not on Jesus and His finished work of
redemption.
    They are always talking about devils, demons, and
demonic activity instead of the riches of God's abundant
grace and the "all spiritual blessings" that belong to
them in Christ. They're not standing in the finished
work of the Cross as the triumphant Church, reigning
in life through Jesus Christ.
    No, just forget about looking at the enemy. Don't
keep your eyes focused on him. Yes, demons and evil
spirit are here; we don't deny their presence. But, thank
God, God has prepared a table of abundant provision
before us in the midst of them all.

                          244
                   The Wisdom of God


    The table the Lord has prepared for us is a table of
abundant riches of provision. For example, on that table
of provision is the new birth, the baptism of the Holy
Spirit, authority over the devil and evil spirits, and
healing. On that table of provision is anything we would
need to put us over in life.
    On that table of provision is victory and deliverance
from anything that would try to bind or hinder us or
keep us from being successful in life. On that table is
blessing and benefit, triumph and victory—not failure
and defeat. On the table of provision is anything else we
need from the time we are born again until we step off
into eternity.
    "Well, why don't I have God's blessing then?" you
ask. Well, the table is prepared for you, but you may be
ignorant of the blessings that are rightfully yours on the
table—the riches of your inheritance in Christ. Or
maybe you don't even know the table of provision is
right there in front of you because the eyes of your
understanding have not been enlightened to see God's
abundant and rich provisions for you.
    Maybe you don't know you're seated at a table of
triumph—not at a table of defeat—so you're letting
Satan walk all over you. Or you may know the
provisions—all spiritual blessings—are on the table,
but you're not appropriating them into your own life.
You're not exercising your authority over the devil by
faith in the power of God's Word.
   Just reach out and take what is yours on that table.
Your Heavenly Father has prepared it all for you. Use
the Name of Jesus because you have authority in that
Name.
    We need to focus on God and what He has provided,
instead of on the devil and what he's doing. We need to

                           245
                 The Triumphant Church


focus on the riches of our inheritance in Christ and the
rights and privileges that legally belong to us as a
result of being in Him. Appropriate for yourself the
riches of being in Him. Focus on your heavenly position
in Christ where we are seated far above all powers and
principalities and all the evil works of the enemy.
   It is true that we were the defeated, conquered ones
before we accepted Jesus Christ as our Savior. Before
we knew Jesus, we were ruled over by Satan. We didn't
know Satan and all his demons were defeated and
dethroned by the King of kings and the Lord of lords.

                 Reigning in Life
    Because of Jesus' victory over Satan at the Cross,
instead of being defeated, conquered, and ruled over,
now in Christ we reign as kings in this life here in this
world. Because we are in Christ, Satan is under our
feet. Before we served as slaves to Satan and spiritual
death, but now we reign in life through Jesus Christ.
This is part of the riches of our inheritance in Christ.
   ROMANS 5:17
   17 For if by one man's offence death reigned by
   one; much more they which receive abundance
   of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall
   REIGN IN LIFE BY ONE, JESUS CHRIST.

    Does this sound like a Church that is being ruled
over and dominated by demons and evil spirits? No!
When does the Bible say we will reign over Satan and
his evil schemes against us? In the sweet by and by?
When we all get to Heaven? No, believers reign as kings
in the realm of life now. We who are born again have
become new creatures in Christ Jesus, and we are now
the victorious ones, not the defeated ones. We are the
triumphant church, not the defeated Church.

                          246
                    The Wisdom of God


   We reign as kings in life through Jesus Christ now.
This is part of the wisdom the Holy Spirit is trying to
get over to the Body of Christ in these Spirit-inspired
prayers in the Book of Ephesians. In times past, we
served as slaves of Satan, but now we walk in the
newness of life (Rom. 6:4). Now because of our joint-
seating with Christ in heavenly places, we reign as
kings through the Lord Jesus Christ.
   This is the message the Holy Ghost through Paul is
endeavoring to get across to the Body of Christ. God
wants the eyes of our understanding enlightened so we
can understand that we reign with Christ in this life.
    God wants us to know we have victory over Satan in
every contest and circumstance, even as Jesus had
victory over Satan when He was on the earth. We don't
have to struggle to be victorious; we just need to stand
our ground with the Word against a defeated foe
according to what we already possess in Christ.
    It doesn't take all day to stand against evil spirits if
you know your authority in Christ. Just speak the Word
to them in the Name of Jesus, and they have to go. You
don't have to fight with them because they've been
defeated and dethroned. By standing on the Word
against them, you are standing in Jesus' victory.
    I'll be honest with you. I don't know whether it's my
righteous indignation that gets stirred up or whether I
just get plain mad, but something rises up within me
when I hear preachers teaching people to fear the devil:
"You'd better be careful! The devil might hear you." Or
"You'd better be careful. The devil might try to lay
sickness and disease on you."
   I have authority over myself and my house. If the
devil ever comes knocking at my door with sickness,
poverty, lack, or oppression, I tell him, "Don't come to

                            247
                 The Triumphant Church


my house. You'll have to go peddle that junk somewhere
else because I won't receive it!"
   But I don't have authority over the devil in your life.
Ultimately you'll have to learn to stand against the
devil for yourself. Of course, if you are a baby Christian,
I can make my faith work for you. But in the final
analysis, God will expect you to take authority over the
devil for yourself.
   If you've already accepted sickness or disease (or
anything else the devil tries to bring your way), then
you've got a mess on your hands, and you'll have to do
something about it. But, thank God, something can be
done in the Name of Jesus.
    If you give someone else permission, they can pray
for you in faith, but, really, you need to do something
about taking authority over the devil for yourself.
That's one way you grow in who you are in Christ. Take
authority over Satan, sickness, disease, or whatever the
enemy is trying to get you to receive. Stand against it
for yourself in the Name of Jesus. Believers make a
mistake by accepting what the devil brings to them.
    You will be defeated if you don't recognize who is in
you and the authority you have in Christ. By failing to
recognize that the Greater One dwells in you, you will
allow the devil to take advantage of you.
   It's one thing for Satan to dominate unsaved people
who are in the kingdom of darkness; they're under his
authority. But Satan and his cohorts are dominating too
many Christians who don't know their authority or
don't exercise their authority.
   That's why the believer needs to come to prayer
understanding that all those spiritual forces have been
defeated by Jesus. When the believer prays, he needs to


                           248
                   The Wisdom of God


pray from a position of victory because he is seated with
Christ in heavenly places, looking down on a defeated
foe.
    When you come to prayer, pray from a seated
position in Christ far above principalities and powers
where you have joint-seating with Christ. Jesus' victory
is your victory. Because of what Jesus did, you are free
from Satan's dominion.
    Too often Christians just hang on and try to do the
best they can, not realizing what their inheritance in
Christ really entitles them to. Instead of taking their
rightful place in Christ as victors, they magnify the
devil, and that gives him access in their lives.
    You can dwell on the negative side of things and you
will become what you dwell on. What you are thinking
about and dwelling on is what you are believing. What
you are believing is what you are talking about. And
eventually what you are believing and talking about is
what you will become.
    This applies in this area of demons and demonic
activity too. If you think the devil's thoughts, you will
become depressed, oppressed, and you can go into error.
Or you can think on the Word, and your thinking can
become enlightened, illuminated, and flooded with
light.
    You can go around preaching how powerful the devil
is, or you can get on the positive side where the eyes of
your understanding have been enlightened to see the
wisdom of God. Then you will be on the scriptural side
and the victory side where you belong as a believer
because of your triumph in Christ.
    Because I know Jesus defeated the devil, that's what
I think on and talk about. And the Greater One puts me


                          249
                 The Triumphant Church


over in life and causes me to succeed because I'm giving
place to God and the power of His Word, not to the
devil.
    Christians are defeated because they believe
"greater is he that is in the world than He that is in
me." They have it backwards in their thinking. Then
they go to confessing that.
   Many are defeated in life because they have a
negative confession; they're always talking on the
negative side of things, and that opens a door to the
devil in their life.
   They're always telling what they're not and what
they don't have and about their weaknesses, failures,
and lack. Invariably they go down to the level of their
confession.
   If you believe and confess that the devil's power is
greater than God's power, Satan will defeat you. But if
you stand your ground in your blood-bought rights in
Christ and confess that, you will rise to the level of your
confession and inheritance.
    What a change would take place in your life if you
stood your ground on the Word of God against every
attack of the enemy in every test or trial! What a
change would take place if you maintained a positive
confession in Christ so you give no ground to the devil
in your life!
    Then you would rise to the level of your confession—
you would take your rightful place in Christ and you
would be able to possess what Christ has already
wrought for you. You would take your rightful place as
the triumphant Church of the Lord Jesus Christ over
all the power of the devil.



                           250
                   The Wisdom of God


     The Triumphant Church—Not the
       Militant or Defeated Church
    There are some people today who are talking about
the militant Church. Among them there are those who
say that the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ needs to
fight devils in order to be successful.
   But I'd rather talk about the triumphant Church
because that's scriptural. Jesus' triumph over Satan is
every believer's triumph. And every believer can enjoy
that triumph and victory if he will walk in the light of
His inheritance in Christ.
   Those who continually talk about the militant
Church are those who are always trying to fight the
devil: "We're waging war on the devil. It's going to be
tough! We are in for a battle!"
    People who talk like that all the time need the eyes
of their understanding enlightened to see that the
battle has already been won by Jesus Christ. Now they
just need to stand in that victory.
     When the eyes of your understanding have been
enlightened to see your rightful position in Christ—that
it is a position of victory—then when you do encounter
the forces of the devil, you'll know what to do about
them. Because of your authority over evil spirits in
Christ, you will stand against them with the Word of
God and put them in their place.
    The Body of Christ is triumphant. Thank God we
can triumph over sin, sickness, disease, poverty, and
bad habits because of our inheritance in Christ. And we
can triumph over devils, evil spirits, and anything else
the enemy would try to bind us with because Jesus
already defeated them for us.


                          251
                 The Triumphant Church


    There was no reason for Jesus to enter into the
tremendous contest for our redemption except for us—
in order to redeem us out of the hands of the enemy.
Thank God, He did it to redeem a Church—a Body of
believers—who would partake of their inheritance in
Christ and rule and reign in triumph and victory over
the devil in the affairs of life. What Jesus did, He did
for us, and Jesus' defeat over Satan belongs to us.
    What is ours in Christ requires nothing but the
taking or appropriating by faith. We don't have to
struggle to believe for something that already belongs to
us. But we do need to know it's ours or we won't take
our rightful position in Christ and take advantage of
what is already ours.
    Wherever God's plan of redemption is unveiled,
people are saved, and they can become masters over
their circumstances and over demon forces, instead of
allowing the devil to dominate them.
   The Body of Christ never needs to yield in cowardice
to the forces of darkness or submit to satanic
domination. No, we must arise boldly in the Name of
Jesus and take our place in our inheritance as sons and
daughters of the Most High God as the triumphant
Church!




                          252
               Chapter 8
   8   Spiritual Warfare: Are You
         Wrestling or Resting?
    Spiritual warfare is a subject some Christians are
overemphasizing today in a way that is not in line with
the Word of God. Actually, some of what is being taught
in the Body of Christ in this area of spiritual warfare
and demonology is scripturally in error. That's why it
would benefit us to study the Word to see how to deal
scripturally with Satan and his strategies.
    Many believers become fearful if you talk about the
devil, demons, and evil spirits and their activities.
Many people seem to think it would be better not to
ever mention the devil or evil spirits. But if you don't
teach believers scripturally from the Word of God how
to deal with the devil, the enemy will just run rampant
and hold high carnival in their lives because they won't
know their scriptural authority.
   2 CORINTHIANS 2:11
   11 Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for
   we are not ignorant of his devices.

    We need to know our enemy. The Bible says we are
not to be ignorant of Satan's devices. Satan has not
changed the least bit in the world. The devil is the same
old devil he has always been, and he uses the same
tactics he has always used. He is the same devil Paul
had to deal with when he penned these words that we
aren't to be ignorant of his devices. And one of Satan's
devices is to get people off into the extreme, even in the

                           253
                 The Triumphant Church


area of spiritual warfare, so they become unfruitful in
the Kingdom of God.
   It seems on any Bible subject, it is most difficult for
the Body of Christ to stay in the middle of the road.
Many believers either get in the ditch on one side of the
road or on the other side of the road. In either ditch,
they become ineffective because extremes and excesses
never produce any fruit to the glory to God.
   Actually, the greatest enemy that has robbed the
Church, even in this area of demonology and spiritual
warfare, is wrong thinking and wrong believing. That's
what initially opens a door to the devil.
    And actually, some people are even thinking wrong
and believing wrong about the subject of spiritual
warfare, and it is going to get the Body of Christ off
track unless we get back on the Word of God.
     Wrong thinking and wrong believing eventually lead
to wrong actions. For example, one error wrong
thinking and wrong believing has produced in some
believers is that they are trying to fight the devil and
pull down strongholds over cities and nations. We need
to look at that practice in the light of God's Word to see
if it's scriptural. We need to know what the Word of God
says on any subject and think and believe and act in line
with God's Word. Then we will get Bible results.
   There is legitimate spiritual warfare, of course.
Spiritual warfare is a Bible subject and one that we
should be interested in because every one of us must
take our stand in spiritual warfare at one time or
another in our Christian life.
   After all, there is a truth to the fact that there is an
adversary arrayed against us and that we are in the
army of the Lord. However, people often take those


                           254
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


truths and run off with them into extremes and error.
Their thinking seems to be, "Well, an army fights the
enemy to defeat him, so let's fight the devil so we can
defeat him."
    But Jesus already "fought" the devil and won. That's
why Jesus said to us, "Occupy, till I come" (Luke 19:13).
We're to take our stand on the Word against a defeated
foe. Therefore, we are in the army of the Lord, all right,
but it's the occupying army. The occupying army is not
in battle. The occupying army is just enforcing the
victory that's already been won by our Commander in
Chief, the Lord Jesus Christ. That's why believers
shouldn't magnify the battle, they should magnify the
triumph!

      'War' and 'Warfare' in the Epistles
    Some people emphasize spiritual warfare to the
point that you would think it is the only subject taught
in the Bible. But you'll find that real spiritual warfare
is entirely different from what many people think it is.
For example, as you study the New Testament,
particularly the epistles, it is amazing how seldom the
words "war" and "warfare" are mentioned.
    It is also amazing to note that when the words "war"
or "warfare" are used in the epistles, never once are the
words "devil" or "Satan" used in connection with them.
Let's look at the words "war" and "warfare" as they are
used in the epistles, which were written to us, the Body
of Christ.
    For instance, in First Corinthians 9:7, Paul asks the
question, "Who goeth a WARFARE any time at his own
charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the
fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of
the milk of the flock?" Paul isn't referring to combating

                            255
                 The Triumphant Church


the devil. He's simply making the point that ministers
should be adequately paid.
    Second Corinthians 10:3-5 is another place in the
epistles where the words "war" and "warfare" are used.
   2CORINTHIANS 10:3-5
   3 For though we walk in the flesh, we do not
   WAR after the flesh:
   4 (For the weapons of our WARFARE are not
   carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
   down of STRONG HOLDS;)
   5 Casting down IMAGINATIONS, and every high
   thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge
   of God, and bringing into captivity every
   THOUGHT to the obedience of Christ.

    If you take these verses out of their context you can
make them say anything you want them to say. Second
Corinthians 10:3-5 has been widely used to apply to
battling demons over cities and countries. But it's clear
by the context that Paul is talking about something
different.
   Paul isn't referring to battling demonic forces over
geographical areas. He is admonishing believers to take
control of their own thoughts and imaginations so they
can prevent the devil's lies from getting a stronghold in
their minds.
   You see, the devil can't get into a believer unless the
door is open. An uncontrolled mind and wrong thinking
have as much to do with opening the door to the devil as
wrong believing and wrong talking do. Believers need to
know those are the major battlefields in life.
    The Bible says, “... God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap” (Gal.
6:7). There's a certain truth in using this verse to tell


                           256
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


sinners they will reap the consequences of what they
sow in sin. But actually, Paul was writing to believers
when he said that.
     Believers are going to reap what they sow—whether
it's good or bad. Believers are sowing words and acts
and deeds every day from which they will eventually
reap a harvest—good or bad—and demonic activity is
not necessarily even involved.
    Most important of all are the words you sow,
because the Bible says there is life and death in the
power of the tongue (Prov. 18:21). And wrong thinking,
wrong believing, and wrong speaking are ways believers
knowingly or unknowingly open a door to the devil in
their lives. That's how believers allow the devil to build
strongholds in their minds and lives.
   Therefore, reading Second Corinthians 10:3-5 in its
entire context, it is telling believers that the truth of
God's Word is a spiritual force mighty enough to
overcome the lies and deception Satan tries to bring
against our minds to bring us into bondage.
   What else do the epistles say about "war" and
"warfare?"
   1 TIMOTHY 1:18,19
   18 This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy,
   according to the prophecies which went before
   on thee, that thou by them mightest WAR a good
   WARFARE;
   19   HOLDING        FAITH,   and     A   GOOD
   CONSCIENCE; which some having put away
   concerning faith have made shipwreck.

   How did Paul tell Timothy to war a good warfare?
By holding faith and a good conscience. In other words,
Paul is simply telling Timothy, "Stay in the fight of


                            257
                  The Triumphant Church


faith. Fulfill the call of God on your life. That is how you
are going to war a good warfare in this life."
   The devil isn't even mentioned in these scriptures.
The statement is simply a challenge to Timothy as a
young minister to fulfill his ministry and not be
deterred by any opposition he would face. Paul gives
another admonition to Timothy in Second Timothy
chapter 2 about warring.
   2 TIMOTHY 2:3,4
   3 Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good
   soldier of Jesus Christ.
   4 No man that WARRETH entangleth himself
   with the affairs of this life; that he may please
   him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.

    When we read the entire context of this passage, we
find it has nothing to do with the devil. Paul is simply
saying, "Stay committed to the call of God on your life,
regardless of the cost." Paul is telling believers that
there's a price to pay to be good soldiers of Jesus Christ;
it takes discipline and dedication.
    Paul is giving Timothy an illustration to remind and
encourage him to keep himself free from the cares of
this world and from any hindrances that would distract
him from serving God and ministering effectively.
    Then in James 4:1,2 we see the terms "war" and
"wars" used in reference to fights, controversies, and
strife which occurred because of believers' uncontrolled
flesh problems.
   JAMES 4:1,2
   1 From whence come WARS and FIGHTINGS
   among you? come they not hence, even of your
   LUSTS that WAR in your MEMBERS [body or
   flesh]?


                            258
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?

   2 Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to
   have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and WAR, yet
   ye have not, because ye ask not.

    The word "war" here is used to describe the results
of unrestrained fleshly activities, and it has nothing to
do with the devil. According to James, spiritual warfare
has to do mostly with fighting the lusts of the flesh that
come to destroy our spiritual development and hinder
our growth in Christ.
    We need to crucify our flesh today just as Christians
did back then (Gal. 5:24). When we don't crucify the
flesh and "keep our bodies under" (1 Cor. 9:27), we can
count on having trouble in life, and it's not even
necessarily demonically inspired.
    Finally, Peter refers to warfare in First Peter 2:11
when he says, "Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts,
which WAR against the soul." Again there is absolutely
no reference whatsoever to the devil. Just as James did,
Peter uses the word "war" to vividly describe the battle
between the lusts of the flesh and the soul—the mind,
will, and emotions.
   Paul also referred to the unregenerate flesh warring
against the mind in Romans chapter 7.
   ROMANS 7:23
   23 But I see another law in my members [body
   or flesh], WARRING against the law of my
   MIND, and bringing me into captivity to the law
   of sin which is in my members [body].

   We have looked at scriptures in the epistles where
the words "war" and "warfare" are used. The devil isn't
mentioned one single time in any of these scriptures.
Yet to hear some people talk, you would think spiritual


                            259
                 The Triumphant Church


warfare is the only subject in the Bible!
   Doctrinally speaking, some people have made a
mountain out of a molehill. I suppose that's because
some Christians want to blame everything on the devil.
But in the epistles, the words "war" and "warfare"
primarily have to do with putting the flesh under and
controlling one's thought life. He can only do that by the
Word of God and with the help of the Spirit of God.
   Many believers are trying to get victory in life some
other way. But what they need to realize is that
genuine spiritual warfare has to do mostly with the
mind and the flesh and fighting the good fight of faith (1
Tim. 6:12). Those who wage a good warfare keep their
mind renewed and their flesh in check and know how to
stand in faith on the promises in God's Word.
    Keeping the body under subjection and controlling
our thought life is not widely taught in the Body of
Christ, so many believers allow the lusts of their flesh
to run rampant and uncontrolled. Many Christians who
have fallen into sin blame it on the devil, but they never
would have sinned if they had taken charge of their own
mind and flesh. They may claim that Satan caused
them to sin, but the truth is that Satan found an open
door through which he could get into their lives. They
were either thinking wrong thoughts or they weren't
crucifying their flesh.
    One of the greatest failures of the Charismatic
Movement is that there has been so little teaching on
sanctification and separation from the contaminating
lusts of the world (2 Cor. 6:17; 2 Peter 1:4). Much of
what believers blame on the devil is the result of their
own lack of sanctification and separation from the
world. We separate ourselves from the world by obeying
the Bible's instructions in Romans 12:1 and 2. If

                           260
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


believers will obey those scriptures, the majority of
spiritual warfare they will ever encounter in life will
already be settled.
    I am not denying the existence of the devil or that
he is our adversary. But when a believer learns by the
Word of God to control his own thoughts and to gain
mastery over his own flesh, he will have no difficulty in
enjoying great victory over the devil who was defeated,
stripped of his power, brought to nought, and reduced to
nothing nearly 2,000 years ago by the Lord Jesus
Christ.
    I am telling you what the Word says on the subject
of spiritual warfare. Rather than always trying to stand
against something, why don't we just stand for
something—the truth of the Word of God and Jesus'
victory over Satan at the Cross of Calvary. As we stand
for the truth and get the Word on the inside of us,
situations in our lives will begin to be corrected. We
need to stay on the offensive, preaching the Word, not
on the defensive constantly trying to battle a defeated
foe as if we have to "defeat" him again and regain the
victory Christ already won for us.

    Do Christians Wrestle With Demons?
    So we can see that the epistles use the words "war"
and "warfare" to describe the conflict between the flesh
and the mind and between the flesh and the recreated
spirit. Then what does the Bible have to say about
"wrestling"? Does the New Testament teach that
believers need to wrestle with demons?
   EPHESIANS 6:10-17
   10 Finally, my brethren, BE STRONG IN THE
   LORD, AND IN THE POWER OF HIS MIGHT.



                            261
                 The Triumphant Church

   11 Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may
   be able to STAND against the wiles of the devil.
   12 For we WRESTLE not against flesh and
   blood, but against principalities, against
   powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
   this world, against spiritual wickedness [wicked
   spirits] in high places.
   13 Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of
   God, that ye may be able to WITHSTAND in the
   evil day, and having done all, TO STAND.
   14 STAND therefore, having your loins girt
   about with truth, and having on the breastplate
   of righteousness;
   15 And your feet shod with the preparation of
   the gospel of peace;
   16 Above all, taking the shield of faith,
   wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the
   fiery darts of the wicked.
   17 And take the helmet of salvation, and the
   sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

   Wrestling denotes strenuous effort, doesn't it?
According to these scriptures, we do "wrestle" against
the devil; we do have the devil to deal with in life. But
read that verse of Scripture in context with the whole
counsel of God's Word—that Jesus defeated Satan for
us and redeemed us from Satan's dominion.
   Well, does the scriptural word for "wrestling" mean
war? No, certainly not. There is a vast difference
between wrestling and warring. If you've ever seen a
wrestling match, you know there is a vast difference
between wrestling and fighting a war.
   One of the meanings of the word "wrestle" in W. E.
Vine's Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words is to
sway. If we will let him, the enemy will come against us
and try to sway us and get us out of faith and into doubt


                          262
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


and unbelief about the Word so he can defeat us. But if
we stand our ground in faith, he cannot sway us from
the Word. Therefore, the "wrestling" we do is not
fighting the devil, but it is a "fight" sometimes to hold
fast to our faith in God's Word.
    You see, the term "wrestling" in Ephesians 6:12 is
used figuratively, just as the word "run" is used
figuratively in Hebrews 12:1: "... let us RUN with
patience the race that is set before us." The Bible doesn't
use the word "wrestle" to tell believers to get into heavy
spiritual combat to wrestle against the devil in prayer.
   No, the Bible is trying to show believers that our
opposition in this life comes from the spiritual realm
and that we are not to fight against flesh and blood, but
we are to take our stand on the Word of God and
enforce our victory against a defeated foe.
    We can accept the victory Jesus Christ already
wrought for us and enforce Satan's defeat in every
situation or we can lose the faith fight. God doesn't
want us to lose, but by failing to believe the Word of
God—who we are in Christ and what we already
possess in Christ—and by failing to exercise our
authority in Christ against the devil, we can allow
Satan to gain the upper hand in any situation.
   So if you don't read the entire context of this
passage in Ephesians chapter 6, but only focus on verse
12, you can become confused and defeated because
you'll think, I'm in for it! I've got to wrestle against all
those principalities, powers, and forces of darkness in
order to try to defeat them.
    But anytime we overemphasize one part of a
scripture and take it out of context, it's too easy to make
it mean something it isn't saying. And if we
overemphasize one verse to the exclusion of other

                            263
                 The Triumphant Church


scriptures, we don't really have the whole counsel of
God on the subject. What we need to do is get our
thinking straightened out and begin believing in line
with the whole counsel of God's Word.
    For example, just reading verse 12, you can see how
people could become overwhelmed, thinking they have
to wrestle and overcome evil spirits. But that's how
people become devil-conscious. And instead of resting in
the finished work of the Cross, they try to wrestle a foe
who they forget is defeated! That gives the devil access
to hold high carnival in their minds, bodies, and lives
because they aren't believing what the Word says Jesus
already did for them.
    By overemphasizing just that one verse alone rather
than the whole counsel of God, people place the
emphasis not on what Christ has already done for
believers, but rather on what the Christian must yet do
in order to get victory over the devil. That is
unscriptural because every believer already participates
in Jesus' victory over Satan.
    We must constantly keep in mind the whole counsel
of God. Although Ephesians 6:12 says we do wrestle
against principalities and powers, the Bible says in
other verses that we are in a battle against a foe that
has already been defeated! So read Ephesians 6:12, but
instead of "camping" there and trying to build a
doctrine on that one verse alone always doing warfare
against the devil—look at the whole counsel of God on
this subject.
    For example, read Ephesians 6:12, "We wrestle
against principalities and power," and read that
scripture with Colossians 2:15: “... having SPOILED
principalities and powers, he [Jesus] made a shew of
them openly, TRIUMPHING OVER THEM in it [the

                          264
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


Cross].”
    And then look at Luke 10:19: “Behold, I give unto
you [the Body of Christ] power to tread on serpents and
scorpions [the devil and his evil forces], and over all the
power of the enemy: and NOTHING SHALL BY ANY
MEANS HURT YOU.”
    Yes, we are in a battle all right, but it's against
principalities and powers that Jesus already defeated in
his death, burial, and resurrection! Notice also in Luke
10:20 that Jesus admonished the disciples not to rejoice
in their authority over the devil but to rejoice in their
relationship with God and in the fact that their names
are written in the Book of Life. So our focus is not to be
on a battle with a defeated enemy, but it is to be on a
relationship with a mighty and loving God.
    Some people are advocating that the Body of Christ
is to fight devils. But why would we have to fight an
enemy that has been dethroned from his place of
authority!
     Yet some folks are coming to church dressed in army
fatigues, and instead of worshipping God, they spend
all of their time yelling, screaming, and trying to do
"battle" against the devil in prayer. They use scriptures
such as Second Timothy 2:3,4 to justify these practices:
“... endure hardness as a GOOD SOLDIER of Jesus
Christ. No man that WARRETH entangleth himself
with the affairs of this life....”
    Actually, in both Second Timothy 2:3,4 and in
Ephesians 6:12, Paul is speaking symbolically. He is
using the words "soldier," "warreth," and "wrestling"
figuratively. Paul was using an illustration from the
Roman army of the day so people could relate to what
he was saying. Paul used concepts that the people of the
day could understand. We can see this when we read

                            265
                 The Triumphant Church


this passage in the context in which it was written.
   2 TIMOTHY 2:3-6
   3 Thou therefore endure hardness, as a GOOD
   SOLDIER of Jesus Christ.
   4 No man that WARRETH entangleth himself
   with the affairs of this life; that he may please
   him who hath chosen him to be a SOLDIER.
   5 And if a man also STRIVE FOR MASTERIES,
   yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully.
   6 The HUSBANDMAN that laboureth must be
   first partaker of the fruits.

   In these verses, Paul uses military, athletic, and
agricultural terms to illustrate various aspects of the
ministry. He uses the word "soldier" in verses 3 and 4 to
depict the hardiness, discipline, and dedication it
sometimes takes to fulfill the call of God. The
expression, "striving for masteries" in verse 5 refers to
winning first place in an athletic event. And the word
"husbandman" refers to a farmer reaping a crop.
   So based on these scriptures taken out of context, if
we're supposed to be a "militant" Church so we can fight
the devil—then based on Second Timothy 2:3-6, we
should also be an "athletic" Church and all come to
church in sweatsuits, or we should be an "agricultural"
Church and come dressed like farmers!
    Do you see how ridiculous this is? We were never
meant to establish outward practices based on verses
used as illustrations. These verses were only meant to
illustrate different aspects of the Christian life and
ministry.
   Some folks—good, well-meaning Christian people—
are coming to church or going to prayer meetings to
make war on the devil in prayer. We aren't supposed to


                           266
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


"make war" on the devil. We are to stand our ground of
victory in Christ enforcing the truth of God's Word,
because Satan was thoroughly whipped at the Cross of
Calvary.
    Also, constantly doing battle and warring against
the devil couldn't be scriptural because it negates Jesus'
victory over Satan at Calvary. Because of Jesus' victory
over Satan, now believers only need to take their place
of authority in the finished work of the Cross and
appropriate by faith what Jesus did for them.

       Wrestling in the Spiritual Realm
    The Church of the Lord Jesus Christ just needs to
learn to stay balanced. Overemphasizing just one
scripture to the exclusion of others or exalting
something other than God's Word, including unbiblical
practices, can get believers off on doctrinal tangents. A
person can take any Bible subject and overemphasize it
and make the Bible say something it really doesn't say.
    That's what some Christians have done with this
issue of "wrestling" the devil. They have resorted to
using fleshly tactics such as yelling and screaming at
the devil to try to "defeat" him. But the wrestling the
believer does against the forces of evil is not done in the
natural realm with fleshly tactics. It's done in the
spiritual realm by faith in the Word.
    Some believers are even taking the scripture about
wicked spirits in heavenly places (Eph. 6:12) out of
context and advocating that we have to get up higher
physically in order to do battle with the wicked spirits
in the heavenlies in prayer! What they really need to do
is get down where the real battle is—in the mind and
flesh!


                            267
                 The Triumphant Church


    What these people are doing is trying to physically
attain to the place where God has already seated us
positionally in the heavenlies in Jesus Christ (Eph. 2:6).
We are already far above principalities and powers in
our position in Christ.
   Not only that, but the Bible says, “... Whatsoever ye
shall bind ON EARTH shall be bound in heaven ….”
(Matt. 18:18), and “... if two of you shall agree ON
EARTH as touching any thing that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven”
(Matt. 18:19). The Bible says we are to do these things
on earth; it never mentions that we have to get up into
the spiritual atmosphere to try to deal with the devil!
All that Jesus and the disciples accomplished, they
accomplished on the earth, not up in heavenlies above
the earth.

     Paul and Silas Prayed the Power of
                 God Down
    If you want to know if a spiritual practice is
scriptural, look in the Word and see if you find Jesus or
His disciples doing it. For example, what did the
disciples do when they were faced with great satanic
opposition?
    Certainly Paul and Silas were experiencing warfare
with the enemy when they were beaten and cast into
prison (Acts 16:18,22,23). There's no doubt about that.
The devil was the one stirring up those people against
them. It wasn't God who caused Paul and Silas to be
cast into prison; it was the devil operating behind the
situation. The devil was opposing the Church and the
gospel message in warfare by working through men.
   Well, did Paul and Silas find a way to get up into


                           268
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


the earth's atmosphere so they could fight the devil?
Did they war and wrestle and yell at the devil and fight
demons in tongues?
    No, when Paul and Silas were cast into prison, their
feet were put in stocks, and they were in a stationary
position, deep in the innermost prison (Acts 16:23-26).
Well, then how could they get up in the heavenlies to
contend with the powers of darkness that were opposing
them? They didn't need to! They praised God until the
power of the Holy Spirit came down!
    Right here on earth, at midnight, Paul and Silas
prayed and sang praises to God, and God heard and
delivered them (Acts 16:25). You see, praying and
singing praises is a type of scriptural "wrestling" in the
spiritual realm because you have to stay in faith to do
it! And because God responds to faith (Heb. 11:6), He
reached down and shook that old jail and delivered Paul
and Silas.
    We don't need to get up into the heavenlies to deal
with evil spirits! We ought to be interested in tapping
into the power of God that's already available to us as
believers right here on earth! Yes, the word "wrestling"
shows us that there is a spiritual conflict between the
believer and the devil. But the wrestling is done in the
arena of faith—in the spiritual realm—not in the
natural realm. It is a fight based on standing firmly on
the promises in God's Word and on the finished work of
our redemption.

    Scriptural 'Wrestling'—The Fight of
                   Faith
   Once believers understand their authority in Christ
and begin to appropriate the finished work of the Cross,


                            269
                 The Triumphant Church


they will understand exactly what kind of "wrestling" it
is that believers are to engage in.
    Believers don't have to overpower and overcome the
devil or wrestle him in their own strength. We only
"wrestle" demonic forces by our faith in God's Word
from a position of victory seated with Christ because we
have authority over demons in Christ. That's why the
only wrestling we engage in is the faith fight. If we are
in any other fight, we are in the wrong fight: “Fight the
good fight of faith ….” (1 Tim. 6:12).
    You see, sometimes you have to "wrestle" to stay in
faith, because as long as the devil can keep you in the
sense realm where he is god, and you look at the
circumstances, he'll whip you every time. But as long as
you stay in the faith realm depending on God's Word to
put you over, you'll whip him every time.
    The faith fight—trusting God's Word to work for you
—is the only fight the Bible says believers are to fight.
The Bible says, “Let us labour therefore to enter into
that rest, lest any man fall after the same example of
unbelief” (Heb. 4:11). We labor to come into God's rest of
faith: “For we which have BELIEVED do enter into
rest....” (Heb. 4:3). Some believers are laboring and
laboring, trying to defeat the enemy. They just need to
enter into the rest of faith because they believe the
Word.
   If you are a believer, you are in Christ and you have
authority over satanic forces now. You don't have to
labor to attain authority over Satan because Jesus
provided that in your redemption by defeating those
principalities and powers for you. So you are not coming
to prayer with the idea that you have to whip
principalities and powers. Jesus did that for you on the
Cross.

                           270
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


    Yes, these principalities and powers try to come
against our lives. But these same principalities and
powers that folks in the Old Testament had such a
struggle with—Jesus defeated them under the New
Covenant and put them to nought. This is the wisdom of
God, not the wisdom of the dethroned powers of this
world who try to blind our eyes to our victorious
position in Christ (1 Cor. 2:6; Col. 2:15).
    So when you come to prayer, always pray from the
understanding that the same principalities and powers
the Bible says we wrestle against in Ephesians 6:12
were thoroughly defeated, dethroned, and stripped of
their authority in your life by Jesus Christ (Col. 2:15).
    How are we going to help other people deal with the
devil? By teaching them what the Word says. Tell them
who they are in Christ and what their blood-bought
covenant rights and privileges are in their redemption.
Tell them about their authority over the devil and how
to use their authority in Christ to deal scripturally with
the powers of darkness.

              Be Strong in the Lord
    The Bible says in Ephesians 6:10 that the believer is
to “... be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might.” You hear folks say, "Well, I'm trying to be
strong." But the Bible doesn't say a thing in the world
about being strong in yourself. Paul said, “... when I am
weak, then am I strong” (2 Cor. 12:10).
    Many times in the circumstances we face in life, we
can feel weak, empty, and helpless in ourselves. But,
thank God, we can lean on the promises of God. We can
go to the Rock, and stand fast on His Word. Paul said,
“... we were pressed out of measure, above strength,
insomuch that we despaired even of life: but we had the

                            271
                 The Triumphant Church


sentence of death in ourselves, that WE SHOULD NOT
TRUST IN OURSELVES, BUT IN GOD which raiseth
the dead” (2 Cor. 1:8,9).
    Trusting in God is trusting in His Word. This is
where many believers are missing it; they're trying to
be strong in their own strength and don't realize all the
strength they need is found in the Word.
    The reason you need to be strong in the Lord and in
the power of His might is so that you can stand your
ground against the wiles of the devil "in the evil day"
(Eph.4:13). The evil day is when Satan will come to test,
try, and tempt you, and you will have to be strong in the
Lord and in the power of His might so you can take
your stand of faith against him.
   One way you become strong in the Lord is by
putting on the whole armor of God (Eph. 6:11-18). You
put on the full armor of God for two reasons:
   1. You wear the armor of God for protection in your
      prayer life. Once you have the armor on, you are
      ready to pray—you are dressed for prayer. The
      object of putting on the armor is so you can enter
      into prayer.
   2. You wear the armor to help you stand in life
      against the wiles, tests, and trials of the devil.

                The Armor of God
    If we need the armor of God to make us strong in
the Lord, then we need to take a closer look at it. Notice
the Bible says first, "PUT ON the whole armor of God..."
(Eph. 6:11). In Strong's Exhaustive Concordance of the
Bible, the word for "put" is enduo. It has the sense of
sinking into a garment; to invest with clothing, to array
or clothe, to endue, have, or put on something.

                           272
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


     So to be strong in the Lord you need to put on or
sink into the armor of God as your protection against
the wiles of the devil. Then in verse 13, the Bible says,
"... TAKE UNTO YOU the whole armour of God...."
According to Strong's Exhaustive Concordance of the
Bible, the word "take" means to take up. In other words,
once you've got the armor of God on, then you've got to
do something with it—use it!
    Paul used an example of the armor of a Roman
soldier here to give us a picture of what the armor of
God is like. The helmet of salvation is the knowledge of
your position in God because of your salvation and
redemption in Christ.
    The helmet of salvation is directly related to the
prayers Paul prayed for the Church in Ephesians 1:17-
22: "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ ... may give
unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation IN THE
KNOWLEDGE of HIM...."
    The helmet of salvation includes having your mind
renewed to know and understand your rights and
privileges in Christ and who you are in Christ. The
helmet of salvation protects your mind—Satan's chief
battleground.
    The girdle of truth represents a clear understanding
of God's Word. Like a soldier's belt, it holds the rest of
the armor in place. Your loins must be girded with the
truth of God's Word because you aren't going to get
anywhere in prayer unless God's Word abides in you
(John 15:7). A successful prayer life must be based on
the promises in God's Word.
    Then you must have on the breastplate of
righteousness. That refers to your right-standing with
God. When you accept Jesus, you become the
righteousness of God in Christ (2 Cor. 5:21). You

                            273
                 The Triumphant Church


wouldn't be any match against the devil if you didn't
have right-standing with God. But because of your
redemption in Christ, you do have right-standing with
God, and you are seated as a joint-heir with Christ:
"And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint
heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:17).
    Your feet must be shod with the preparation of the
gospel of peace. To be effective in prayer, you must walk
in the light of God's Word (1 John 1:7). As the psalmist
of old said, "The entrance of THY WORDS giveth
light..." (Ps. 119:130). It's hard to walk when the path
before you is dark. But with the light of God's Word,
you never have to walk in darkness under Satan's
dominion.
    As soon as the light of God's Word comes, faith is
there. Feeding and meditating on God's Word brings
light and faith because "... faith cometh by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God" (Rom. 10:17). And faith in
God's Word is your major defense against Satan's
onslaughts against your mind and your life.
    Then you must take up the shield of faith. Notice
verse 16 says, "ABOVE ALL, taking the shield of
faith... . " Why does the Bible say, "above all"? Read the
rest of that verse: "ABOVE ALL, taking the shield of
faith ... WHEREWITH ye may be able to quench all the
FIERY DARTS of the wicked." Above everything else
take the shield of faith because that's what you use to
quench the enemy's fiery darts that he'll try to assail
against you.
    The shield of faith has to be used in your everyday
life and also in your prayer life. While you're praying,
the devil will send every kind of fiery dart to your mind
to get your attention diverted to keep you from staying
in faith. You will have to quench every one of his fiery

                           274
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


darts with the shield of faith in God's Word.
    Then you also need to use the shield of faith in your
everyday life against the devil because you need to stay
in faith on a daily basis, not just while you're praying.
You need to think faith thoughts and speak faith words
continually so you don't give the devil a place in you. If
you stay in the arena of faith in the promises of God,
you will be able to stand against Satan and put him on
the run.

             The Sword of the Spirit
   What about the sword of the Spirit? Did you ever
stop to think about it? Every part of the armor is
protective or defensive, except one, and that is the
sword of the Spirit. The sword of the Spirit—the Word
of God—is the only part of the armor you fight Satan
with.
    You don't fight Satan with the helmet; it protects
you. You don't fight Satan with the shield of faith or the
girdle of truth; they protect you. You don't fight Satan
with your breastplate of righteousness or shoes of
peace; they protect you. But you do fight Satan with the
Word of God—the sword of the Spirit. It is the only
offensive weapon the Bible mentions.
    What is the scriptural way to deal with these forces
of darkness? It's with the sword of the Spirit. How did
Jesus deal with the devil in His earthly ministry?
   For one thing, Jesus never went looking for the devil
to do spiritual combat with him. Yes, the Bible says
that Jesus was tempted by the devil (Luke 4:1,2). But
when Satan tempted Jesus to oppose Him from bringing
redemption to mankind, Jesus did not groan against the
devil for three hours or try to pull down Satan's


                            275
                 The Triumphant Church


strongholds. He was protected by truth and
righteousness, so He simply stood His ground and used
the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God.
   In every temptation, Jesus said, "It is written"
(Matt. 4:4,7,10; Luke 4:4,8,12). Jesus Himself quoted
the Word of God, using the Word against the devil as a
sword. In that sense, Jesus was "fighting" or "wrestling"
with the devil. But the only weapon Jesus used against
the devil was faith in the Word of God. He didn't fight
Satan any other way. And the devil left, defeated. If
Jesus wrestled with the devil using the Word, then
that's how we should deal with the devil too.
    In this encounter with the devil, Jesus showed us
how to wield the sword of the Spirit as an offensive
weapon against Satan. Jesus is our example, even in
spiritual combat with the devil.
    Think about it. If we didn't know how to use the
sword of the Spirit, we could have all the other pieces of
armor in place, and we would still be at a disadvantage.
But, thank God, we can just stand in faith on the Word,
using the sword of the Spirit against Satan by jabbing
him in every encounter, speaking the Word, saying, "It
is written!"
    Why does the Bible call the Word of God "the sword
of the Spirit"? The word "Spirit" and "anointing" are
often used synonymously in the Bible. The Bible says
the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing
(Isa. 10:27). God's Word is anointed. So we could say the
sword of the anointing—the Word of God—breaks the
yoke of Satan's bondage.
    Go after any yoke that binds you with the sword of
the Spirit—the sword of the anointing! Free yourself
from those things Satan tries to bind you with and walk
in the liberty Jesus already purchased for you by using

                           276
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


the sword of the anointing—God's holy written Word!

       The Power in the Blood of Jesus
    What else does it mean to “... be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might” (Eph. 6:10)? We can't be
strong in the Lord without appropriating the saving
power of His blood.
   COLOSSIANS 1:13,14
   13 Who hath DELIVERED US FROM THE
   POWER OF DARKNESS, and hath translated us
   into the kingdom of his dear Son:
   14 In whom we have redemption THROUGH HIS
   BLOOD, even the forgiveness [remission] of
   sins.

    Every benefit and blessing we possess in our
redemption, including complete and total victory over
Satan, is based on Jesus and His triumph over Satan at
the Cross. We have victory over Satan because of Jesus'
shed blood. The oldtimers in Pentecost understood a
truth about the blood of Jesus. They would plead the
blood against the devil. That's scriptural.
   When you plead the blood against the devil, you are
really pleading your covenant rights of protection
against the enemy (Isa. 54:17; Luke 10:19; Phil. 2:9,10;
Col. 1:13).
   REVELATION 12:11
   11 And they overcame him [Satan] by the
   BLOOD OF THE LAMB, and by the word of their
   testimony....

    A missionary told an interesting testimony once
about the power in the blood of Jesus for protection.
This woman was left alone in a mission station in a
foreign field, and a peculiar kind of scorpion was

                            277
                 The Triumphant Church


common in that area. Its sting was deadly; no one had
ever survived who was stung by it.
    This missionary was down in the village one day,
and one of these deadly scorpions stung her. It scared
her at first because she was alone in the missionary
station; all the other missionaries were gone. She
related, "At first, I panicked. Then I just said, 'I plead
the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ against this scorpion
sting.'"
   The natives in that area all watched her, expecting
her to fall down dead. But she never did swell up or
show any sign of sickness whatsoever. Those natives
watched her as she went on about her business. In fact,
the whole village followed her around because they
were sure she was going to die.
    That missionary never did experience any ill effects.
She just pled the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ and
stood on her covenant rights of protection, and she
never experienced any harm (Isa. 54:17; Mark 16:18;
Luke 10:19). As a result of that miracle, most of those
natives were saved.
   Yes, we have to deal with Satan and those things
that try to come against us to hurt and destroy us. But
there is victory in Jesus and in His blood. Let's not
magnify the devil and his work and what he's doing in
our lives. Let's magnify the victory we have in our blood
covenant in Christ over all the works of the devil.

      The Believer's 'Battle' Stance—To
                    Stand
   Once you have the armor on, you are ready to take
your position of "battle" against the devil. However,
because of Jesus' victory over Satan and the believer's


                           278
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


position in that triumph, the Bible only gives us one
position of "warfare" against the devil: "Having done
all, STAND" (Eph. 6:13).
   Notice how many times the word "stand" is used in
Ephesians 6:11-14. The word "attack" is never used. The
Holy Spirit is telling the believer his position in the
good fight of faith against the enemy is a stand of faith
and a stand of resting on the promises of God. He is to
stand against the devil with the Word.
   1. "Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be
      able TO STAND against the wiles of the devil"
      (Eph. 6:11).
   2. "... take unto you the whole armour of God, that
      ye may be able to WITHSTAND in the evil
      day ..." (Eph. 6:13).
   3. "... and having done all, TO STAND" (Eph. 6:13).
   4. "STAND therefore, having your loins girt about
      with truth ... the breastplate of righteousness: ...
      your feet shod with ... the gospel of peace; above
      all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall
      be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
      wicked" (Eph. 6:14-16).
    The position the believer takes is not one of
wrestling as if he had to defeat the devil, for the battle
has already been fought and won on Calvary. But
sometimes there is strenuous effort or "wrestling" in
standing against the enemy based on your faith in God's
Word. But that's the only position of "battle" the Bible
mentions—to stand and to withstand the devil with the
full armor of God, using the anointed sword of the
Spirit against him.
   The Bible says believers are to stand against the
enemy wearing the armor of God so they can


                            279
                 The Triumphant Church


successfully withstand the devil in the evil day of
testing, trial, and temptation (v. 13). Whether we like it
or not, the Holy Ghost is telling the Body of Christ that
the evil day is coming when the enemy is going to come
against each one of us. But Jesus said, "... In the world
ye shall have TRIBULATION: but be of good cheer; I
have OVERCOME the world" and that includes the god
of this world, Satan (John 16:33; 1 Cor. 4:4 ).
    What are you going to do when Satan comes against
you? Are you going to get all the saints to pray for you?
That will only help temporarily. Have you ever noticed
that no believer can stand against the tests and
temptations of the devil just because the saints pray for
him? Sooner or later, each of us has to stand our ground
on the Word against the wiles of the devil for ourselves.
And if we don't do it, it won't be done.

               Stand Fast in Faith
    Once you have your armor on, the only position the
Bible tells you to take against Satan is to stand against
him—that means to enforce his defeat with the Word of
God. Paul said, "Stand, stand, withstand and stand."
He never said "attack, attack, counterattack, and
attack."
    The purpose of putting on the armor is so that we
can stand against the wiles or the craftiness and deceit
of the devil. The Bible does not say we are to put on the
Bible so we can attack the devil, but rather so we can
stand successfully against his attack.
    When I say "stand," I am using this word in
reference to our enemy Satan. This is not to be confused
to mean that we are not to go into all the world and
preach the gospel (Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15). In


                           280
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


reference to the world we are to go, but in reference to
the enemy we are to stand.
    Therefore, in true spiritual warfare, we do not go
looking for the devil. But when he shows up, we deal
with him. Ephesians 6 doesn't instruct us to fight
against the devil, but to put on the whole armor so we
can stand against the attacks which Satan launches
against us. We take the sword of the Spirit and fight
the good fight of faith by enforcing Satan's defeat and
our triumph over him.
    The Bible also tells us exactly how to stand strong
against the enemy. We do it by the Word and by our
steadfast, unwavering faith in the Word.
   1 CORINTHIANS 16:13
   13 Watch ye, STAND FAST in the FAITH, quit
   [act] you like men, be strong.

   2 CORINTHIANS 1:24
   24 ... for by FAITH ye STAND.

    The word "stand" in this verse means to be
stationary and to persevere. The word "fast" means
firmly fixed; stable; unyielding. Your position against
the devil is to stand firmly fixed, stable, and unyielding
on the promises of God's Word for your life. You are to
be firmly fixed in your perseverance of faith in God's
Word.

               Stand Fast in Grace
    Since Satan is a defeated foe, now it is up to us to
take our stand against him in the faith and also the
grace the Lord Jesus Christ has provided for us: "Let us
therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and FIND GRACE TO HELP in time


                            281
                 The Triumphant Church


of need" (Heb. 4:16).
   ROMANS 5:1,2
   1 Therefore being justified by faith, we have
   peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:
   2 By whom also we have access by faith into this
   GRACE wherein WE STAND....

    Why would the Holy Spirit through Paul tell the
Body of Christ to stand fast in faith and in the grace of
God? Because everything in the world, including our
adversary Satan, will try to pull us out of faith and try
to get us to walk by sight and by our own strength.
    The Bible says, "There are ... so many kinds of
voices in the world, and none of them is without
signification" (1 Cor. 14:10). And if you listen to all the
voices round about you—even some well-meaning
friends, preachers, and theologians—you could be
pulled back from walking by faith and be tempted to
walk by sight and by circumstances. But, thank God,
we're firmly fixed, standing on God's Word and in God's
grace. And that is God's provision for protection against
the onslaughts the enemy would try to assail against
us.
    It's only your faith in God and His Word that will
enable you to stand successfully against the devil. First
Corinthians 16:13 says, "Watch ye, stand fast in the
faith, quit [act] you like men...." In other words, "Don't
be a baby in faith and just give up when Satan comes
against you. Stand against him with the Word. We were
all spiritual babies when we were first born again, but
babies grow up. We're not supposed to stay babies in
our dealings with the devil. We are to put him on the
run.
   Satan will tempt you to doubt God and His Word,


                           282
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


and he will use adverse circumstances and tests and
trials to do it. But in the face of every adversity, you'll
have to learn to stand your ground firmly fixed on God's
Word. You'll have to learn to be spiritually mature by
becoming strong in faith and in the grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ so you can successfully stand against the
enemy's lies and deceptions (Rom. 5:2).

            Stand Fast in One Spirit

   PHILIP PLANS 1:27
   27 Only let your conversation [your manner of
   life and conduct] be as it becometh the gospel of
   Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else
   be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that YE
   STAND FAST IN ONE SPIRIT, with one mind
   striving together for the faith of the gospel.

    Standing in faith and standing in God's grace are
mighty fortresses against the devil. But the Bible also
says we are to stand fast in one spirit. Strife and discord
always open a door to the devil (James 3:16). When you
stand strong in unity and forbid Satan to bring strife
and division, you prevent him from gaining any ground
in you.
    Believers will probably never see every little thing
just exactly alike because we are all at various stages of
spiritual growth and development. But just because we
disagree on minor issues doesn't mean we can't be in
one spirit and one accord. Believers stand strong
against the enemy by being in one spirit and by not
allowing division and strife. Even in the face of
differences, believers must learn to stand fast in one
spirit if they are going to maintain a strong defense
against the devil.
   If you are standing fast in one spirit you can

                            283
                The Triumphant Church


disagree without being disagreeable. Walking in love
closes the door to the devil. When you get over into the
Spirit and you walk in love, many issues you thought
were so important don't seem to be so important any
more. We shouldn't let little issues divide us. Be one—
stand fast in one spirit.

             Stand Fast in the Lord
   PHILIPPIANS 4:1
   1 Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and
   longed for, my joy and crown, so STAND FAST
   IN THE LORD, my dearly beloved.

   What else does the believer do to take his stand
against Satan? The Bible says we are to stand fast in
the Lord. What does that mean? The answer is found in
Ephesians 6:10.
   EPHESIANS 6:10
   10 Finally, my brethren, be STRONG IN THE
   LORD, and [be strong] IN THE POWER OF HIS
   MIGHT.

    Taking our stand against Satan includes taking our
rightful position in Christ. Did you notice in Ephesians
6:10 that the Bible says we are to be strong in two
areas:
   1. Be strong IN THE LORD, and
   2. Be strong IN THE POWER OF HIS MIGHT.
   To be strong in the Lord, you'll have to be strong in
His Word. But what is the power of God's might? The
power of God's might is the Holy Ghost. Go through the
New Testament and notice how many times "power" is
mentioned in connection with the Holy Spirit. Some of
these verses are listed below (See also Acts 10:38; Rom.
15:13,19; 1 Thess. 1:5).

                          284
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?

   LUKE 4:14
   14 And Jesus returned in the POWER of the
   SPIRIT into Galilee....

   LUKE 24:49
   49 And, behold, I send the PROMISE [the Holy
   Spirit] of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in
   the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
   POWER from on high.

   ACTS 1:8 Amplified
   8 But you shall receive POWER—ABILITY,
   EFFICIENCY and MIGHT—when the HOLY
   SPIRIT has come upon you....

   1 CORINTHIANS 2:4
   4 And my speech and my preaching was not
   with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
   demonstration of THE SPIRIT and of POWER.

   You won't be able to be strong in the power of God's
might without being filled with the Holy Spirit and
without praying. Part of taking a victorious stand
against the devil is to be filled to overflowing with the
Holy Spirit. You won't be able to stand strong against
the devil as an empty vessel.

                   Fervent Prayer
     Look at James 5:16 in connection with the power of
the Holy Spirit. One way the believer continues to be
filled with the Holy Spirit so he can stand in the power
of God's might is by effectual fervent prayer.
   JAMES 5:16
   16... The effectual FERVENT PRAYER of a
   righteous man AVAILETH MUCH.

   The King James Version says the fervent prayer of a


                            285
                The Triumphant Church


righteous man avails much. But just how much does
fervent prayer avail? What are the possibilities of the
power that is made available by fervent prayer?
   The Amplified Bible gives us more light about how
much the prayers of a righteous man avail: "... The
earnest (heartfelt, continued) prayer of a righteous man
MAKES TREMENDOUS POWER AVAILABLE—
DYNAMIC IN ITS WORKING" (James 5:16 Amp.).
    Tremendous, dynamic power is made available in
effectual fervent prayer. Now read Ephesians 6:10 and
18 again.
   EPHESIANS 6:10,18
   10 ... be strong in the Lord, AND in the POWER
   of HIS MIGHT [making tremendous power
   available by the Holy Spirit]....
   18 PRAYING always with all prayer and
   supplication in the Spirit....

     The power of God is always available, but prayer
brings that power into manifestation. Earnest, fervent
praying makes tremendous power available. Praying
not only makes tremendous power available—but the
power in fervent prayer is dynamic in its action.
Earnest, fervent prayer is one way the believer gets
filled to overflowing with the Holy Spirit—the power of
God—to stand strong against the enemy.
    Once you have put on the full armor of God and you
are strong in the Lord and in the power of His might,
then you are ready to pray. With the armor on you are
ready to make tremendous power available by the help
of the Holy Spirit. When you wear the whole armor of
God and you are strong in the Holy Spirit, then the
Bible says you are in a position to pray effectually.
   How does prayer relate to spiritual warfare?


                          286
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


Because the battle in true spiritual warfare is first in
the believer's own mind and flesh. But then it is in
prayer and in faith. And many times the victory is won
by standing your ground on the Word in the arena of
prayer. Many times the reason we're not ready for the
battles we encounter in the natural realm in life is that
we haven't entered into the prayer arena and the fight
of faith as we should have in the spiritual realm.
    Or to say it another way, we're not "prayed up" and
full of the Holy Ghost. When you're not prayed up, it's
easy to be defeated when Satan comes along to test you.
    In Ephesians 6:10-17 Paul took some time in talking
about the armor of God to get us ready for verse 18:
"PRAYING always with all prayer and supplication in
the Spirit...." Once you have the armor on, only then are
you ready to pray with heartfelt, continued prayer (Eph.
6:18; James 5:16). "Praying always" denotes the fact of
not giving up in prayer, but continuing to pray.
    The prayer mentioned here is not some special type
of prayer or some special spiritual activity the believer
engages in to try to dethrone Satan or pull down
strongholds over communities, cities, states, or nations.
    Paul is talking about a lifestyle of communion and
fellowship with God so we can resist the wiles and
deceptions of the enemy that try to discourage and
defeat us. By maintaining a lifestyle of fellowshipping
in God's Presence, we'll be able to pray effectively with
all prayer and supplication in the Spirit.
    The Bible doesn't tell the believer to aggressively
attack the devil or the devil's kingdom in prayer. No,
the believer is to fervently reach out in prayer for other
saints and for ministers who are reaching the lost:
"PRAYING ALWAYS ... FOR ALL SAINTS" (Eph. 6:18).


                            287
                 The Triumphant Church


    Another translation of this verse says, "Praying with
all manner or all kinds of prayer and supplication in
the Spirit." So just wrestling against the devil all the
time in prayer couldn't be scriptural because it's not
praying with all manner or all kinds of prayer.

                'Warring' Tongues
   If you follow the leading of the Holy Spirit, He will
lead you to pray with all manner of prayer, not just one
kind of prayer, because He will lead you in line with
what the Word says.
   That's why those in the Body of Christ today who
overemphasize the "warfare" aspect of prayer couldn't
be praying with "all manner of prayer and supplication
in the Spirit." They claim there is an unction of the
Holy Spirit in prayer, a tongue that only the devil
knows, that is used to combat the devil and to do
warfare against Satan in the Spirit.
   But there is no scripture to support that we are to
pray against the devil or to combat the devil in tongues.
Not one single time is tongues mentioned in the Bible in
connection with the devil. Even if the Holy Spirit did
give you an unction in prayer to deal with the devil,
that is only as the Holy Spirit leads, and you can't teach
that to others (1 Cor. 12:11).
    In other words, you can't announce to people, "Let's
everyone War against the devil in tongues." If there is
an unction that should come by the Holy Spirit in
prayer, it's as the Holy Spirit leads, not as man leads or
directs, and it will be in line with the Word of God.
    Also, another reason this doctrine of "warring
tongues," or trying to defeat the devil in prayer, is not
scripturally balanced is that it focuses prayer, not on


                           288
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


fellowshipping with God the Father, but on "battling"
the devil and wicked spirits in heavenly places. So
Satan, not God, becomes the focus of our spiritual
attention and activities.
    The whole idea behind "warring tongues" is that
these tongues are a way to "plow through" the demon
spirits that infest the heavenlies above the earth. It's
true that evil spirits are up there in the heavenlies. But
people who are teaching others to pray in warring
tongues are trying to use fleshly weapons to try to do a
spiritual job.
    The teaching of warring tongues ignores the biblical
emphasis of tongues and the finished work of the Cross
of Calvary. The Apostle Paul wrote that when the
Christian speaks in tongues he is speaking mysteries
unto God (1 Cor. 14:2), and he is magnifying God (Acts
10:46). The Bible also says the believer is edifying
himself when he prays in tongues (1 Cor. 14:4; Jude 20).
And God sometimes speaks to man through the
spiritual gift of diversity of tongues (1 Cor. 12:28).
These are the biblical uses of the gift of tongues.
    Ignoring the biblical use of tongues, this teaching on
"warring tongues" strives to make speaking in tongues
something that is done against the devil instead of unto
God. And it takes the believer's focus away from God to
focus on the devil.
    Thank God for praying with other tongues. But don't
waste your time praying in tongues trying to defeat an
already defeated foe. Instead yield to the Holy Ghost,
and let Him use you as you pray in tongues to be a
blessing to humanity. That is the most effective way to
gain ground for God and do great damage to the devil's
kingdom of darkness.
   You see, in principle nowhere in the Bible are we

                            289
                 The Triumphant Church


taught to pray against the devil in tongues. And in
practice nowhere in the Bible do we find believers doing
it.
    In every instance when believers pray, they are
praying to a faithful and loving Heavenly Father who
hears and answers prayer. Jesus Himself tells us who
we are to pray to: “... Whatsoever ye shall ASK THE
FATHER in MY NAME, he will give it you" (John
16:23). This extreme "warring" teaching, however,
ignores this biblical emphasis and makes speaking in
tongues something that is done against the devil
instead of unto God.
    Instead of leading saints into deeper spirituality,
this teaching and its extreme practice actually leads
believers into fleshly extremes and excesses because it
focuses mainly on experiences in prayer. This extreme
teaching leads believers into error because the
emphasis is not on what Christ has already
accomplished for the believer in His redemption, but on
what the believer has yet to do to achieve victory over
the devil.
    You see, instead of emphasizing the triumph of
Jesus over Satan, the finished work of the Cross, the
triumphant position of the believer in Christ, and the
authority that is resident in each believer, this warfare
teaching portrays believers as being oppressed and
defeated and still under the lordship of Satan, trying to
"war" his way free to a place of victory.
    The emphasis is not on what Christ has already
done, but rather it is on what the believer must still do
himself in order to get victory over the devil. So the
believer is instructed to "groan" and to "war" in tongues
in order to obtain victory.
   Study for yourself the New Testament instruction

                          290
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


on dealing with the devil (Eph. 4:27; James 4:7; 1 Peter
5:9). Only when believers submit themselves to God and
give the devil no place in them will they be able to resist
the devil and take their stand on the Word of God
against him. Then the devil will flee. Only when
believers have done their part can they deal effectively
with the devil and stand successfully against him with
the Word of God.
    Actually, the error in this extreme spiritual warfare
teaching is one of focus and position. True biblical
authority over the devil is exercised from a seated and
victorious position in Christ far above all principalities
and power in which the believer recognizes that the
enemy is defeated and stripped of his authority.
    That doesn't mean we are to overreact to error by
neglecting and ignoring what is genuine and scriptural.
For instance, the Church cannot afford to back away
from valid intercession and true spiritual warfare,
which come as a result of the promptings of the Holy
Spirit. The Body of Christ should and must press into
the genuine and biblical operations of the Spirit of God
and be fervent in prayer as the Scriptures teach. There
is a genuine prayer and supplication that the Church
must stir itself up to participate in.
   Yes, there are spiritual battles to be fought and won
in prayer. But the fight in prayer is a faith fight.
Spiritual battles in prayer are fought and won from a
seated position in Christ far above principalities and
powers where the believer recognizes that the enemy is
under his feet (Eph. 1:3,22) and therefore looks down on
a defeated foe.
   Much damage has been done to the Body of Christ
by a lack of solid biblical teaching in this area. The
Word of God tells us that the Word is to dwell in us “...

                            291
                 The Triumphant Church


richly in ALL WISDOM..." (Col. 3:16).
    It is the wisdom of God's Word dwelling in the
believer richly that brings maturity in dealing biblically
with the devil. A lack of scriptural teaching and sound
wisdom in God's Word has resulted in foolish practices
occurring in the Body of Christ that are hurtful to
people. They are harmful because they're extreme and
cause people to get in the ditch on one side of the road
into fanaticism, excess, and error.
    Also, the Body of Christ needs to be careful about
ministers who teach certain practices that are not
demonstrated in the Word of God. Just because some
ministers teach and demonstrate certain practices in
their services, that doesn't mean what they are doing is
right or scripturally sound.
    Ministers need to be careful what they feed the flock
of God. Paul told Timothy, "Preach the word ..." (2 Tim.
4:2). People need to be taught what the Word has to say
about the enemy so they aren't ignorant of Satan's
devices. But stay with the Word, not opinion or
experiences. Experiences can be helpful, but only if
they're in line with the Word. Ministers should be
careful to lay a foundation with the Word of God first.
   TITUS 2:1
   1 But speak thou the things which become
   SOUND DOCTRINE.

    People need to be careful that what they teach about
spiritual warfare is doctrinally sound. Some people
teach that they have further revelation about warfare
that's out beyond the Word of God.
    There are no revelations outside of the Word. Any
revelation you have that comes from the Spirit of God is
in line with the Word of God. People get off into the


                           292
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


devil's territory when they leave the Word. They say
they are following the Spirit, but you can't follow the
Holy Spirit apart from the Word. Put the Word first and
the Spirit second.
    When people endeavor to follow what they call the
"spirit," but hey leave the Word, they open themselves
up to deception. For example, a certain minister had a
marvelous ministry for years that was based on the
Word of God. But some years later, a pastor friend of
mine attended several of this man's meetings. My
pastor friend said there were a few things that were
doctrinally off, but they weren't crucial to the truth of
the gospel. But then this pastor said, "I went back
another night, and the minister told some 'revelations'
he'd had."
    The pastor had known this minister for thirty years,
and the man had been in the ministry many years. But
it doesn't matter how long you've been in the ministry,
or how doctrinally correct you've been in the past, if you
leave the Word, you throw yourself wide open for
satanic deception.
    This pastor friend of mine told me, "I went up to
him after the service and said, 'I've been going along
with you on some things you've said because they
weren't all that important. But tonight you said some
things, and you're just going to have to give me chapter
and verse for it.'"
    Remember the Bible said, “... In the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word be established" (2 Cor.
13:1). If people would only heed this scripture, it would
keep them from building doctrinal aircastles and going
into deception on the basis of one scripture taken out of
context.
   This minister replied, "Oh, you won't find what I'm

                            293
                 The Triumphant Church


preaching in that thing," referring to the Bible. "I'm way
out beyond that!"
    If a person is out beyond the Word of God, he's out
too far for me. Don't leave the Word and try to follow
the Holy Spirit. It won't work. You'll be out in a realm
where Satan can deceive you. There is a reason Paul
told Timothy to preach the Word (2 Tim. 4:2). Putting
the Word first will always keep you scripturally
balanced so you don't open yourself up doctrinally to
Satan's deceptions.
    I've told people for more than fifty years, "Examine
what people say by the Word, and if it doesn't line up
with the Word, don't accept it, whether it's me teaching
or someone else." It's what the Word says that counts.
Put the Word first. I'm against extremes in any area,
because extremes and teachings that go beyond the
Word do damage to the Body of Christ.
    We need to realize that as in all spiritual subjects,
there's just a fine line between true spirituality and
excess and fanaticism. So let's just be open to the Word
of God and to the Spirit of God, and let Him lead and
teach us. Stay down the middle of the road doctrinally;
let's not get into a ditch on either side of the road.
    No matter who teaches on any Bible subject, you
need to study the Bible yourself to determine whether
what is being taught is right. Don't accept what
someone teaches just because he claims to be an
"expert." You can't accept what anyone says on any
biblical subject unless the person backs it up with the
Word of God.
   In the study of demonology and spiritual warfare, as
with all Bible subjects, be careful to "rightly divide"
what the Bible says on the subject (2 Tim. 2:15). That
way you won't be ignorant of Satan's devices, but

                           294
      Spiritual Warfare: Are You Wrestling or Resting?


instead you'll stand fast in faith and stop his strategies
in every circumstance. As you obey the Word instead of
people's opinions or experiences and you engage in true
biblical warfare, you'll overcome the enemy's attacks
every time!




                            295
               Chapter 9
   9   Pulling Down Strongholds
   Evil spirits like to remain in the locality where they
have established strongholds. The Bible gives us an
example of this in Mark chapter 5 when Jesus delivered
the madman of Gadara. The evil spirits that inhabited
the man didn't want Jesus to send them out of the
country.
   MARK 5:9-13
   9 And he [Jesus] asked him, What is thy name?
   And he answered, saying, My name is Legion:
   for we are many.
   10 And he BESOUGHT HIM MUCH that he
   would NOT send them away OUT OF THE
   COUNTRY.
   11 Now there was there nigh unto the
   mountains a great herd of swine feeding.
   12 And all the devils besought him, saying, Send
   us into the swine, that we may enter into them.
   13 And forthwith Jesus gave them leave....

   Those evil spirits didn't want to leave that locality,
so they asked to go into a herd of swine. Jesus gave
them permission (v. 13).

        Strongholds in Certain Regions
    We can glean from this passage of Scripture that
demons do like to gang up in certain parts of the world
or in certain countries. For example, in my travels it's
easy for me to discern what kinds of spirits are in a


                          297
                    The Triumphant Church


given locality.
   I can drive through a city and know what spirits
predominate there, not because of any spiritual gifts
operating in my life, but just by spiritual perception.
    Every Christian should have enough spiritual
perception about them to discern what spirits
predominate in a given locality. Sometimes there are
predominately immoral or occult spirits, or spirits
promoting foreign religions. Small towns, not just large
cities, can have spiritual strongholds or spirits ruling
over them too.
    The evil spirits that dominate a city will try to get
into the local churches if there are people in the church
who will yield to them and let them in.

                  Spirits in the Church
   My wife and I were visiting in a certain town once,
and the pastor in that town wanted me to preach in his
church. I was in the field ministry at the time teaching
the Word. He kept asking me to hold a meeting in his
church.
    Finally, I told him I wasn't going to do it. I explained
I didn't want to preach in that town unless God
definitely told me to. You see, in that city the people
prided themselves on being conservative; actually, they
were so conservative in the area of giving that they
were stingy. The same spirits that predominate in a city
will get into the church if believers let them.
     I told the pastor that the town was full of reserved,
conservative people, motivated and influenced by stingy
devils and demons. I told him those demons had gotten
into his church and that the people wouldn't support me
if I went there. His eyes got big and his mouth fell open.

                            298
                Pulling Down Strongholds


He asked, "Has anyone been talking to you?" I replied,
"No one but the Lord."
    I told that pastor, "The people in your church don't
treat ministers of the gospel right! That's why I won't
come." Unless God tells you to, there's no use going to a
group like that anyway. They can't receive God's best
because they mistreat God's servants; they are being
motivated and influenced by evil spirits.
     A "stingy" church is not scriptural. The Bible says,
"... Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the
corn. And, The labourer is worthy of his reward" (1
Tim. 5:18). Paul was quoting the Old Testament (Deut.
25:4), but he was talking about those in the ministry (1
Cor. 9:7-14).
    When church members yield to evil spirits like that
it gives the devil a right of way in the church. It grieves
the Spirit of God, and He will be hindered from
manifesting Himself the way He wants to. We need to
realize that as Christians we don't have to listen to the
devil. And we don't have to yield to him either! We don't
have to allow the god of this world to dominate our
thinking or our actions.

           Pulling Down Strongholds
    So whatever kind of spirits dominate in a city, those
same spirits will try to get into the church if people in
the church yield to them and let them in. We can see
this, for example, in Paul's Epistles to the Corinthians.
    Corinth at that time was one of the most immoral
cities of the East. The immoral spirit that had control of
the city got into the church because someone in the
church let it in through wrongdoing. There was a man
in the church who was cohabiting with his father's wife.


                           299
                  The Triumphant Church


Paul had to deal with these moral issues in his Epistles
to the Corinthian church.
   1 CORINTHIANS 5:3-5
   3 For I verily, as absent in body, but present in
   spirit, have judged already, as though I were
   present, concerning him that hath so done this
   deed,
   4 In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye
   are gathered together, and my spirit, with the
   power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
   5 To deliver such an one unto Satan for the
   destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
   saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

   Notice in this passage that Paul only dealt with the
man and his sin; he didn't deal with a "ruling spirit" in
the church or in the city. It's true that evil spirits which
predominate in a city will try to get into the church
unless believers and the church as a whole learn to
stand against them. However, in our day there has been
an extreme teaching in this area.
    Some people today are getting into a ditch with
some of the things they are doing in the name of
spiritual warfare. Spiritual warfare is biblical. But
some marvelous and dear Christians have gotten into
excess by some extreme practices that are not biblical.
    Although a lot of these extremes are listed under
what they call "pulling down strongholds," they do not
line up with what we read in the New Testament. Some
of these dear, misguided people believe they are
actually pulling down entire strongholds over cities and
nations through such excess in prayer as "warring"
tongues.
   Actually, we have no direct scriptural support for
pulling down demonic strongholds over entire cities and

                            300
                Pulling Down Strongholds


nations, especially in the sense of warring tongues and
yelling at the devil. We need to go back to what the
Word of God says.
   What does the Word of God say specifically about
pulling down strongholds? And according to the Bible,
what is a "stronghold"?
   2 CORINTHIANS 10:4,5
   4 (For the weapons of our warfare are not
   carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
   down of STRONG HOLDS:)
   5 Casting down IMAGINATIONS, and every high
   thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge
   of God, and bringing into captivity every
   THOUGHT to the obedience of Christ.

    In these verses, Paul defines what a stronghold is.
Because some have failed to keep this in mind, they
have taken one verse and gone to the extreme with it.
For example, some have taken the phrase "the weapons
of our warfare are mighty for the pulling down of
strongholds" in verse 4 out of its setting and tried to use
it to present a complete doctrine by itself. By taking
verse 4 out of the context of the next verse, they begin
to make it say something that it really isn't saying.
   But reading verse 4 by itself as a complete doctrine
can leave the wrong impression. You would be missing
what Paul is really talking about here unless you read
verse 4 about strongholds in the context in which it was
written.
    Actually, in this passage Paul is talking about a
believer taking charge of his mind—his own thinking.
He is talking about mental bondages—thoughts,
reasonings, and arguments—which are contrary to God
and His Word.


                           301
                 The Triumphant Church


   Paul is primarily talking about casting down
reasonings, imaginations, and thoughts—not casting
down demonic strongholds over cities and nations.
  The meaning comes through more clearly in The
Amplified Bible.
   2 CORINTHIANS 10:4,5 (Amplified)
   4 For the weapons of our warfare are not
   physical (weapons of flesh and blood), but they
   are mighty before God for the overthrow and
   destruction of strongholds.
   5 [Inasmuch as we] refute ARGUMENTS and
   THEORIES and REASONINGS and every
   PROUD and LOFTY THING that sets itself up
   against the (true) knowledge of God; and we
   lead every THOUGHT and PURPOSE away
   captive into the obedience of Christ, the
   Messiah, the Anointed One.

    The biggest battle you will ever "fight" is in this
area of the thought life and the mind. It all starts right
there. Fighting the battle of the mind so you can stay in
faith is the way to victory in every area of life.
   Well, what are you going to do about that battle? In
order to successfully fight that battle, you're going to
have to renew your mind with the Word and cast down
reasonings, imaginations, and vain thoughts that are
contrary to the Word, because Satan will try to bombard
your mind.
    The devil's strategy is to sidetrack believers from
fighting the true spiritual battle, which is taking every
thought captive to the obedience of God's Word.
   Satan knows that believers who stay in faith in the
Word are dangerous to him because they can fulfill
God's will in the earth for their lives.
   That's why Satan likes it when believers get off into

                           302
                Pulling Down Strongholds


error and excess trying to fight demonic strongholds
over cities and nations. He knows those strongholds
can't be once and for all pulled down before the time—
before Adam's lease on this earth runs out.
    So the devil is laughing the whole time believers are
hollering at him in the flesh trying to pull him down
over cities. Believers who fight the devil on those terms
are actually defeating themselves by having to
continually rely on their own fleshly efforts.
    They are either trying to pray down the victory that
is already theirs, or they are trying to pray down ruling
spirits that cannot be pulled down before the time.
    Let's look at this passage in Second Corinthians in
some other translations, so we can understand better
what the Bible is talking about by the word
"stronghold."
   2 CORINTHIANS 10:4,5 (Moffatt)
   4 The WEAPONS OF MY WARFARE are not
   weapons of the flesh, but divinely strong to
   demolish FORTRESSES—
   5 I demolish THEORIES and any RAMPART
   thrown up to resist the knowledge of God, I take
   every project prisoner to make it obey Christ.

   2 CORINTHIANS 10:5 (TCNT)
   5 We are engaged in confuting ARGUMENTS
   and pulling down every BARRIER raised
   against the knowledge of God....

   2 CORINTHIANS 10:5 (Phillips)
   5 Our battle is to bring down every DECEPTIVE
   FANTASY and every imposing defense THAT
   MEN ERECT against the true knowledge of
   God....

   2 CORINTHIANS 10:5 (Knox)

                          303
                 The Triumphant Church

   5 Yes, we can pull down the CONCEITS OF
   MEN, every BARRIER OF PRIDE which sets
   itself up against the true knowledge of God.

   You can readily see that this passage is talking
about taking thoughts, imaginations, arguments,
theories, reasonings, deceptive fantasies, conceits of
men, and barriers of pride and bringing them into
subjection to the true knowledge of God—the Word of
God.
   This is not telling me to take captive the thoughts in
your mind and pull them down. I can take authority
and control of my own thoughts, but I can't take
authority over your thoughts.
   You see, because the mind is the greatest area of
"battle" for the attacks of Satan, the devil's strategy is
to erect strongholds in our thinking that "exalt
themselves against the true knowledge of God."
    That is one reason believers need the full armor of
God with the helmet of salvation and the shield of faith
—so they can protect themselves from Satan's attacks
on their minds. And the Bible teaches that we are to
repent of wrong thoughts and conform to the image of
Christ in our thinking (Rom. 8:29; Phil. 2:5). That is one
of our greatest defenses against Satan.
    There is an overemphasis today on some aspects of
spiritual warfare, that is based in part on a
misapplication of this scripture here in Second
Corinthians 10:4 and 5 about "pulling down
strongholds," and on the scripture in Ephesians 6:12
about "wrestling." But both of these passages of
Scripture must be taken in the contexts in which they
were written, not lifted out of context to build extreme
doctrines of spiritual warfare.


                           304
                Pulling Down Strongholds


    I believe in spiritual warfare, of course, and in
spiritual militancy in the sense of being aggressive and
fervent in the Word and in the Holy Ghost. Be
aggressive to preach the Word. Be aggressive and
fervent to preach the new birth, the baptism of the Holy
Ghost, healing, and the believer's rights and privileges
in Christ. Be aggressive to preach faith and prayer and
to preach against devils and demons.
   But in our day there is an extreme emphasis being
placed on the subject of spiritual warfare and spiritual
militancy to the exclusion of other Bible truths which
can get the Church off into a ditch.
    Yes, we should be fervent in the Word, fervent in
prayer, and fervent in evangelism. "Militancy" meaning
fervency is fine. But when people teach others to focus
all their spiritual activity on the person of the devil—
that is both dangerous and unscriptural.
    Where this is the most obvious is in the practice of
trying to dethrone Satan over cities. Militancy is taken
out of bounds when we get the idea that we have to
accomplish something which Jesus has already
accomplished for us. Why would believers want to
dethrone Satan or principalities and powers?
    The truth is that Jesus has already defeated Satan
for us (Col. 2:15). As the Church, we triumph in that
victory—the victory Christ has already won for us at
the Cross. Our job now is to make manifest the savor of
that victory through the knowledge of God's Word (2
Cor. 2:15). We continue to triumph in that victory in our
daily lives as we walk in God's Word.
   We don't have to win the battle over Satan. Jesus
has already won the victory for us. We must simply
walk in the light of God's Word concerning that victory,
and Jesus' victory over the devil will become manifest in

                          305
                   The Triumphant Church


our daily lives.
   The fact that Satan and his hosts are still here
should not disturb us. They will continue to be here
until Adam's lease runs out. While they are here, we
can continue to enforce the reality of their defeat by the
Word. Colossians 2:15 says that Jesus "having spoiled
principalities and powers, he [Jesus] made a shew of
them openly, triumphing over them in it [the cross]." We
are to be triumphant in Jesus' victory.
    The fact that Satan rules over the lives of others
through strongholds of deception does not mean we
have to re-enter into battle with him as Jesus did. We
can use the Name of Jesus in prayer to bind and break
his hold over people and then we can simply enforce
Satan's defeat through the preaching of the Word. The
light of God's Word will dispel the darkness of Satan's
deceptions in people's lives.
    We don't have to war in the flesh by trying to defeat
Satan through excesses such as warring tongues and
yelling at the devil. The business of trying to do battle
with evil spirits in the heavenlies is an effort of the
flesh to try to defeat an already defeated foe.
    However, in some Christian circles today,
dethroning Satan over cities and nations through
spiritual warfare and violent intercession is seen as an
absolute prerequisite before any revival or effective
evangelism can take place. But you can't find that in
the Bible.
    Study the Gospels and the Book of Acts for yourself
to see what Jesus and His disciples did to bring revival.
One thing you'll notice is that Jesus and His disciples
didn't pull down demonic powers ruling over entire
cities or countries. Jesus and His disciples only dealt
with demons in connection with individual people.

                           306
                Pulling Down Strongholds


    But I find it very interesting that in reading the
Book of Acts, the disciples don't make any reference to
the type of warfare and militancy that is being taught
in some places in the Church today.
    It's also interesting that we don't find this kind of
warfare practiced in the Book of Acts either. No, the
Book of Acts shows us a Church that is conscious of the
Presence of God and focused on teaching people the
Word of God for themselves so they can be successful in
every area of life—not one that is all consumed with
fighting the devil.
    Study the accounts given in the Book of Acts about
what was taught to the people and what was practiced
by the disciples. You will find it is contrary to much of
the emphasis taught and practiced in some circles in
the Body of Christ today. The Book of Acts emphasizes
the teaching of sound doctrine and preaching the gospel
to bring people into the Kingdom of God, not fighting
devils and bringing down strongholds.
    We don't have scripture for pulling down
strongholds over cities and nations, but we do have
scriptural grounds for binding the operations and
strategies of principalities and powers in their attacks
against us (Matt. 18:18; Luke 10:19; Phil. 2:9,10).
   We do that with the Word of God and the Name of
Jesus. We take our stand against the enemy with the
Word of God, just as Jesus did (Matt. 4:4-10).
   Let's look at the ministry of Jesus to see what He
did since Jesus and His disciples certainly turned the
world of that day upside down.
    Well, how did they do it? If they did it by doing
direct battle with the devil then we have scriptural
grounds to do the same thing. But if they didn't, then


                          307
                 The Triumphant Church


we shouldn't be doing it either.
    Believers should follow the doctrine we see practiced
in the New Testament.

    Did Jesus Try to War Against Devils
         In His Earthly Ministry?
    Looking at the ministry of Jesus, what did Jesus do
to change towns and cities? Did He have to pull down
strongholds through militant prayer as He went from
city to city? Did He find it necessary to "discern" the
ruling spirit in every city and then do war against it?
   And did Jesus and His disciples teach others to
identify the ruling spirit over cities in order to pull
down strongholds? No, we don't find scripture where
they did.
   Study the Gospels for yourself. You will find that
the focus of Jesus' ministry was that He just traveled
from place to place teaching and preaching the gospel—
the Word (Matt. 4:23; 9:35; Luke 13:22). He put the
Word first, and the Word set people free from Satan's
dominion.
   LUKE 4:18,19
   18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he
   hath anointed me TO PREACH THE GOSPEL to
   the poor; he hath sent me to heal the
   brokenhearted, TO PREACH DELIVERANCE to
   the captives, and recovering of sight to the
   blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,
   19 TO PREACH the acceptable year of the Lord.

    Jesus was sent to teach and preach the gospel, not to
focus on tearing down strongholds over cities and
nations. It was the preaching and teaching of the gospel
that brought strongholds down in people's lives!

                           308
                Pulling Down Strongholds


   If it were possible to tear them down over cities,
Jesus would have taught the people to do that, but He
didn't. The Bible says Jesus set the captives free from
Satan's bondage by teaching the people what the Word
says and to walk in the light of the Word (John 8:32).
    We need to do what Jesus did. Preach deliverance
by preaching the Word. Notice Luke 4:18 doesn't say
Jesus prayed deliverance. It says He preached
deliverance.
    In other words, He told people what the Word said:
"If the Son [the Word made flesh] therefore shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed" (John 8:36). People
were delivered as the Word set them free.
   In the scripture that we do have, Jesus prayed His
prayers to the Father (Mat. 11:25; Luke 23:34 John
11:41,17:1).

      Did the Early Church Try to War
       Against the Devil Over Cities?
   Read the Book of Acts for yourself and see if there is
specific scripture stating that the disciples made it a
point to fight ruling demonic princes over cities,
regions, or countries.
    Actually, when the Early Church came together and
spoke in tongues, the Bible says they were declaring the
wonderful works of God: "...we do hear them SPEAK
IN OUR TONGUES THE WONDERFUL WORKS OF
GOD" (Acts 2:11). They weren't fighting the devil in
tongues. They weren't pulling down strongholds over
Jerusalem. They were extolling God. God was the focus
of their praying.
   Let's look at biblical examples of how believers
prayed when they faced great opposition from the devil.

                          309
                 The Triumphant Church


Did they fight and war against devils when Satan came
against them? No, they didn't.
    For example, in Acts 16:25, Paul and Silas overcame
the opposition of the enemy by praying and praising
God. Peter and John also faced an attack (Acts 4:3,5-7).
It came through men. They were commanded not to
preach and teach anymore in the Name of Jesus (Acts
4:18).
    When Peter and John were finally let go, they went
to their own company and prayed to God. According to
the Book of Acts, these believers didn't battle in tongues
against principalities and powers in the heavenlies.
They didn't "wage war" against the devil or try to pull
down religious devils over the city. What did they do?
   ACTS 4:24
   24 And when they heard that, THEY LIFTED UP
   THEIR VOICE TO GOD with one accord, and
   said, LORD, THOU ART GOD, which hast made
   heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all that in
   them is.

   They didn't magnify the problem or the devil. They
extolled and magnified God. I'm not saying that their
praise and worship didn't indirectly affect the spiritual
opposition of the devil. I'm saying it was not their
primary concern.
   It's sad, but some believers spend most of their time
praying against the devil and talking about him.
Listening to them, you would think that Jesus was
"poor ole Jesus," who didn't accomplish anything when
He died and rose from the dead and spoiled
principalities and powers and put them to nought (Col.
2:14,15). There's nothing that will sap the praise to God
out of your prayers like focusing all your attention on
the devil.

                           310
                Pulling Down Strongholds


   In Acts chapter 4 when the Early Church was facing
great opposition from the devil, these believers lifted
their voices to God in faith. They stayed in faith; they
didn't try to fight the devil in prayer. They talked about
how big God is, and then they brought God's Word to
Him in prayer (Acts 4:25-28).
    Actually, from verses 25 through 28, the believers
talked about how big God is and about the great things
He had done. Then they talked about what the Word of
God said about their situation.
   ACTS 4:25-28
   25 Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast
   said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people
   imagine vain things?
   26 The kings of the earth stood up, and the
   rulers were gathered together against the Lord,
   and against his Christ.
   27 For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus,
   whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and
   Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people
   of Israel, were gathered together,
   28 For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
   counsel determined before to be done.

   Then finally in verse 29 they talked about the
problem. But notice that this entire prayer lasts from
verse 25 through 30, but they only talked about the
problem in one verse (v. 29).
   ACTS 4:29,30
   29   And      now,   Lord,    BEHOLD     THEIR
   THREATENINGS: and grant unto thy servants,
   that with all boldness they may speak thy word,
   30 By stretching forth thine hand to heal; and
   that signs and wonders may be done by the
   name of thy holy child Jesus.


                           311
                 The Triumphant Church


    These believers talked to God, not to the devil, even
though the devil was behind the problem. And the main
thing they asked God to do about their problem was to
grant them boldness to preach the Word with signs and
wonders following. They knew it was the Word that
would change people and situations (John 8:32).
    This prayer of the Early Church shows us the
biblical way to pray as a church when we face the
opposition of the powers of darkness. We're to pray to
God. And we're to pray for boldness to proclaim the
Word so the Word can set people free from Satan. And
furthermore, notice they did not even ask God to do
anything about the devil.
    Then when the Early Church was scattered abroad
because the persecution greatly increased, believers
went everywhere preaching the Word—not directly
fighting devils: "Therefore they that were scattered
abroad went every where PREACHING THE WORD"
(Acts 8:4). If any strongholds had to be pulled down, the
Church trusted God and His Word to do that.
   When Peter was in prison, the saints who were
praying for him didn't try to fight against the religious
devils over Jerusalem. They made their earnest
entreaty to God in Peter's behalf.
   ACTS 12:5
   5 Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer
   was made without ceasing of the church UNTO
   GOD for him.

   What about when the prophets and teachers
gathered together in Antioch? Did they go into spiritual
warfare and spend their time in spiritual combat before
they sent out Paul and Barnabas for the work of the
ministry?


                          312
                 Pulling Down Strongholds

   ACTS 13:2
   2 As THEY MINISTERED TO THE LORD, and
   fasted, the Holy Ghost said....

    No, they ministered to the Lord! They didn't fight
devils. Too many times folks know nothing about
ministering to the Lord; they spend all their time trying
to fight a defeated foe.
    It's when believers begin to minister to God, that
things begin to happen. They create an atmosphere
where the Holy Spirit can speak: "As they ministered to
the Lord ... the HOLY GHOST SAID... " (v. 2).
   Also, in the Book of Revelation, Jesus talked to the
Apostle John on the Isle of Patmos about a literal
church that existed in the city of Pergamos at that time.
The city of Pergamos was a stronghold of Satan, yet
Jesus didn't say one thing about fighting satanic rulers
over that city. Surely if it were scriptural to do spiritual
warfare in the sense of fighting the devil and pulling
down strongholds over cities, Jesus would have
mentioned it here.
   REVELATION 2:12,13
   12 And to the angel of the church in Pergamos
   write; These things saith he which hath the
   sharp sword with two edges;
   13 I know thy works, and where thou dwellest,
   even WHERE SATAN'S SEAT IS: and thou
   HOLDEST FAST MY NAME, AND HAST NOT
   DENIED MY FAITH, even in those days wherein
   Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain
   among you, WHERE SATAN DWELLETH.

   Although Jesus said the church at Pergamos was
"where Satan's seat is," notice that Jesus did not tell
the believers there to do warfare against Satan. No,
Jesus commended the believers for holding fast to His


                            313
                 The Triumphant Church


Name and for not denying the faith (v. 13). In other
words, He was encouraging them to stay in faith!

    Did the Disciples Try to War Against
             Devils Over Cities?
   Let's look at some other passages in the New
Testament to see what the disciples did as they traveled
from city to city. These men were handpicked by Jesus.
We can't find any Scriptures that say the disciples went
around pulling down strongholds over the cities they
went into. Neither can we find Scriptures where they
taught others to do that.

                   In Jerusalem
   When Peter and John went up to the temple, it was
the Name of Jesus that healed a man who had been
lame from birth.
   ACTS 3:6,16
   6 Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none;
   but such as I have give I thee: IN THE NAME OF
   JESUS CHRIST OF NAZARETH rise up and
   walk....
   16 And HIS NAME through faith IN HIS NAME
   made this man strong....
    Notice that it was the Name of Jesus that was called
into question and feared by the religious leaders of the
day (Acts 4:10-12), because it is in that Name that
believers have authority over the devil.
    In other words, the disciples were teaching about
the power and authority invested in the Name of Jesus
(Acts 4:15-20). The Name represented all the authority
of Jesus and all that He accomplished when He arose
victorious over death, hell, and the grave.


                          314
                Pulling Down Strongholds

   ACTS 6:7
   7 ... the WORD OF GOD increased; and the
   number of the disciples MULTIPLIED in
   JERUSALEM greatly; and a great company of
   the priests were obedient to the faith.

    It's interesting that when the Word of God
increased, the number of disciples multiplied. If
believers really want to do much damage to Satan's
kingdom, they should get out and preach the Word.
    It's the Word of God that has the power to set people
free. Not once in the city of Jerusalem did the disciples
talk about pulling down strongholds or ruling princes
over cities through warring tongues or screaming at
devils.
   In fact, if you go through the Books of Acts and
highlight what the disciples taught as they traveled
from place to place, you will find that the disciples
taught and preached the Word of God. They also taught
about the Name of Jesus, and they taught and preached
the gospel—salvation through Jesus Christ.
    In every instance, receiving and acting on the Word
was what brought people out from under the dominion
of Satan's strongholds.

           Did Paul Try to War With
           Strongholds Over Cities?
    Let's see what the Apostle Paul did as he traveled
and came into contact with strongholds in certain cities.
After all, this great man of faith wrote much of the New
Testament. If pulling down strongholds over cities
through warring tongues or screaming at devils is a
scriptural practice, surely Paul said something about it,
or he practiced it in the cities where he went.


                          315
                 The Triumphant Church


                Paul in Damascus
    Did Paul try to pull down strongholds over the city
of Damascus? No, immediately after his conversion,
Paul began to preach about Jesus. Jesus Christ was the
focus of Paul's teaching, not the devil and not
strongholds.
   ACTS 9:20,22,27,29
   20 And straightway he PREACHED CHRIST in
   the synagogues, THAT HE IS THE SON OF
   GOD....
   22 But Saul increased the more in strength, and
   confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus,
   PROVING THAT THIS IS VERY CHRIST....
   27 But Barnabas took him [Paul], and brought
   him to the apostles, and declared unto them
   how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that
   he had spoken to him, and how he had
   PREACHED BOLDLY AT DAMASCUS IN THE
   NAME OF JESUS....
   29 And he spake BOLDLY IN THE NAME OF
   THE LORD JESUS, and disputed against the
   Grecians....

    Notice that Paul magnified and lifted up the Name
of Jesus Christ. It's the Name of Jesus that breaks
strongholds in people's thinking and in their lives. Paul
taught people to exalt Jesus' power and majesty. But
when believers teach others to concentrate on pulling
down strongholds and warring against devils, the
emphasis is on Satan and what he's doing. They are
actually magnifying the devil, and that opens a door
and gives him access. But when believers magnify God,
they give Him access to their hearts and lives.
   As we read the accounts of Paul traveling
throughout the cities and villages of that day, the first


                          316
                Pulling Down Strongholds


thing we notice is that he established believers in the
faith. We see no scripture where Paul made it a point of
warring against the devil.
   ACTS 16:4,5
   4 And as they [Paul and Timothy] went through
   the cities, they delivered them the decrees for to
   keep, that were ordained of the apostles and
   elders which were at Jerusalem.
   5 And so were the churches ESTABLISHED IN
   THE FAITH, and INCREASED IN NUMBER
   DAILY.

    As believers were established in the faith, the Bible
says their numbers increased daily. Wherever the Word
is preached, there's an increase of souls into the
Kingdom of God. That's how to scripturally "pull down"
strongholds—the preaching of the Gospel pulls them
down in people's lives by getting them saved.

                 Paul in Philippi
    Did Paul try to pull down strongholds over Philippi?
It was in Philippi where Paul had to deal with a demon
that was stirring up trouble through a young damsel.
   ACTS 16:16-18
   16 And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a
   certain damsel possessed with a spirit of
   divination met us, which brought her masters
   much gain by soothsaying:
   17 The same followed Paul and us, and cried,
   saying, These men are the servants of the most
   high God, which shew unto us the way of
   salvation.
   18 And this did she many days. But Paul, being
   grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I
   command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to


                          317
                 The Triumphant Church

   come out of her. AND HE CAME OUT THE
   SAME HOUR.

    An evil spirit was using this woman to hinder the
disciples' ministry in this city. This woman had a spirit
of divination or fortune telling, and the spirit in her
knew who the disciples were.
    But notice that Paul only dealt with the spirit that
was causing this woman to continually cry out and
cause a disturbance—he didn't deal with any
strongholds over the city.
    That woman followed the disciples many days, and
the spirit in her proclaiming everywhere, "... These men
are servants of the most high God, which shew unto us
the way of salvation" (v. 17). What she said was so, but
who wants the devil testifying for him!
    It was vexing to have the devil advertising for them,
so why didn't Paul rebuke that foul spirit the very first
day? Or the second day? The reason he didn't is that the
gift of discerning of spirits didn't operate when Paul
wanted it to operate; it operated as the Holy Spirit
willed (1 Cor. 12:11). Until the operation of the gift of
discerning of spirits came into manifestation, Paul was
just as helpless as any of us would be to deal with that
particular situation.
    Paul waited until the Spirit of God gave him insight
into the spiritual realm before he did anything about
the evil spirit that was causing the disturbance. You
see, Paul wasn't just binding the evil spirit in his
operation against him and the work of the gospel—he
was casting an evil spirit out of a person. Paul had to
have the anointing and the gifts of the Holy Spirit in
operation to get the woman delivered of that demon.
   When the gift of discerning of spirits came into


                          318
                Pulling Down Strongholds


operation, Paul just spoke to the evil spirit operating
through the woman: " . . . I command thee in the
name of Jesus Christ to COME OUT OF HER . . . "
( A c t s 16:18). And the Bible says, “... he came out THE
SAME HOUR" (v. 18).
   It didn't take hours of yelling, screaming, and
carrying on for Paul to cast that evil spirit out of her.
And Paul didn't try to pull down the ruling spirit over
Philippi because of that incident either. Paul merely
spoke to the evil spirit in the Name of Jesus and
commanded it to come out, and it came out in the same
hour.
    The key was that Paul waited until he had the
insight of the Holy Spirit before he acted. In other
words, he dealt with the evil spirit when he was in the
Spirit—by the power and unction of the Holy Spirit—
and the woman was delivered. We will have to rely on
the Holy Spirit, just as Paul did.
   In some Christian circles today, people are hollering
and shouting and yelling at the devil, and not much is
happening. That's because many people are trying to
deal with the devil in the energy of the flesh.
     It's the anointing or the power of the Holy Spirit
that breaks the yoke of the devil's bondage (Isa. 10:27).
The anointing is on the Word, so you're not going to
have any anointing to deal with the devil unless you've
taken time to sow the Word into your heart. And you're
not going to have the power of God operating in your
life unless you're a doer of the Word.
    Some Christians today are not in the Word. They
haven't taken time to hide God's Word in their hearts
by studying, reading, and meditating on it, so they try
to fight the devil in the energy of the flesh. It won't
work. You can't "fight" the devil in the flesh—shouting

                           319
                The Triumphant Church


and carrying on. People who do that are just wearing
themselves out.
    The Bible says, "That which is born of the flesh is
flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit"
(John 3:6). The devil and his host of demons are spirit
beings. That's why you can't deal with them in the
energy of the flesh and win. The Body of Christ is going
to have to realize they need to deal with things of the
spirit realm by the Spirit of God with the Word of God.
    Paul couldn't do any more than you or I can without
the anointing! We are totally dependent upon the Word
of God and the anointing of the Holy Spirit.
   MARK 16:17,20
   17 And these SIGNS shall follow them that
   believe; IN MY NAME SHALL THEY CAST OUT
   DEVILS....
   20 And they [the disciples] went forth, and
   preached every where, THE LORD WORKING
   WITH THEM, and CONFIRMING THE WORD
   with signs following. Amen.

    What did Jesus tell the disciples about casting out
devils? Did Jesus say He would confirm it with signs
and wonders following when His disciples yelled at the
devil in tongues? Or did Jesus say he would confirm it
with signs and wonders when His disciples taught their
spiritual experiences? Emphatically, no!
    The Bible says Jesus worked with His disciples,
confirming the Word they preached with signs following.
He told them to preach the Word and the signs would
follow (Mark 16:20).
    Put the Word first and you won't have to worry
about signs following—including casting out devils. One
sign Jesus said would follow the Word is that believers


                          320
                Pulling Down Strongholds


would cast out devils (Mark 16:17-20).

                  Paul in Athens
    The city of Athens was another major city where
much wickedness prevailed. What did Paul teach people
to do about the spiritual strongholds in that city?
   ACTS 17:15,16
   15 And they that conducted Paul brought him
   unto Athens: and receiving a commandment
   unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him
   with all speed, they departed.
   16 Now while Paul waited for them at Athens,
   HIS SPIRIT WAS STIRRED IN HIM, when he
   saw THE CITY WAS WHOLLY GIVEN TO
   IDOLATRY.

    The Athenians had erected different images to
various gods on Mars Hill. The Scriptures say that Paul
perceived that the city of Athens was wholly given over
to idolatry (v. 16). Paul's spirit was stirred because of
the strongholds he saw in that city.
    What did Paul do about the idolatry and the
strongholds in that city? Did he wage spiritual warfare
against the "spiritual prince" of Mars Hill in high
places? No, the Bible tells us exactly what he did. He
taught the people the gospel. He preached the Word.
   ACTS 17:17,22,23
   16 Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with
   the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in
   the market daily with them that met with him....
   22 Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars' hill,
   and said, Ye men of Athens, I PERCEIVE THAT
   IN ALL THINGS YE ARE TOO SUPERSTITIOUS.
   23 For as I passed by, and beheld your
   devotions, I found an altar with this inscription,


                          321
                The Triumphant Church

   TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye
   ignorantly worship, HIM DECLARE I UNTO
   YOU.

   According to Acts Paul didn't attempt to pull down
any demonic strongholds over the city even though he
saw that there were many strongholds there in the city.
He preached the gospel, and he preached about Jesus
(Acts 17:31,32). No mention was even made about the
devil in what Paul preached.
    Those who believed what Paul said were saved.
That's how Paul broke the strongholds over people's
lives—he preached the Word so they could get saved!
Then Satan no longer had legal dominion over them.

                 Paul in Ephesus
   Acts chapter 19 shows us Paul's ministry in
Ephesus. The people of Ephesus made images of the
goddess Diana and sold them. When Paul came to town
preaching Jesus Christ, they felt their livelihood was
threatened, so they rose up against Paul to cause
turmoil and to hinder him from preaching the Word.
    Some kind of an evil spirit was surely ruling over
that city causing the people to come against Paul,
wasn't it? But Paul didn't launch a spiritual militant
attack to pull down the "Diana spirit."
    It was Demetrius the silversmith who drew
attention to the goddess Diana, not Paul. Paul was busy
drawing attention to Jesus. He was busy preaching the
Word so people could come out from under Satan's
control.
   ACTS 19:1,8-10,20
   1 ... Paul having passed through the upper
   coasts came to Ephesus ….


                         322
                Pulling Down Strongholds

   5 And he went into the synagogue, and SPAKE
   BOLDLY for the space of three months,
   disputing and persuading THE THINGS
   CONCERNING THE KINGDOM OF GOD.
   6 But when divers were hardened, and believed
   not, but spake evil of that way before the
   multitude, he departed from them, and
   separated the disciples, disputing daily in the
   school of one Tyrannus.
   7 And this continued by the space of two years;
   so that all they which dwelt in Asia HEARD THE
   WORD OF THE LORD JESUS, both Jews and
   Greeks ….
   20 So mightily GREW THE WORD OF GOD and
   PREVAILED.

    The city of Ephesus was taken over by the temple
cult of Diana. Everywhere there were temples to Diana.
She was the "goddess" that prevailed over that city, and
there were other gods in other temples too. The city was
given over to idol worship.
   But Paul dealt with those demonic strongholds by
preaching the Word! It took him about two years, but
the Bible says the Word grew and prevailed. So many
people believed the Word Paul preached that the Word
began to prevail in their lives. The Word of God
prevailed in that city as individual people accepted the
gospel and made Jesus Christ their Lord.
    On the Day of Pentecost, the Early Church started
off with 120 people. Reading the Book of Acts, it's easy
to see that the devil tried to keep the Early Church
from growing. You talk about the devil's onslaught!
   The devil attacked the Early Church on every side
with persecution, tests, and trials. Satan tried to
destroy the Church in its infancy, but the believers
overcame him with the Word. And because the Word

                          323
                 The Triumphant Church


prevailed, the Lord added daily to the Church such as
should be saved (Acts 2:47).
    Satan uses the same strategies today—tests and
trials—that he used in the days of the Early Church. He
is still trying to destroy the Church's effectiveness in
spreading the gospel. But the Bible says the gates of
hell shall not prevail against the Church (Matt. 16:18).
Well, the Church today is equipped with the same
armor the early believers used against the devil to
successfully withstand his onslaughts and remain
victorious over him.
    We can overcome the enemy's strategies just as the
Early Church did, not by focusing our attention on
fighting a defeated foe or by trying to pull down
demonic strongholds over cities, but by praying
scripturally. We have authority to bind principalities
and powers in their operations against us. And we can
pray to God for people's hearts to be open to the gospel.
Then we need to get out and preach the Word and tell
people about their covenant rights in Christ so they can
be set free.
    Besides, have you ever been to those countries
where people have supposedly pulled down demonic
strongholds over them? It's interesting that after
they've "pulled them down," they are still there! That's
because it's only the Word that changes people and
affects nations and brings people out from under
Satan's dominion and bondage so they can learn how to
stand against him.

             Tormenting' the Devil
   As long as I'm talking about tactics against the devil
that don't work and are harmful to the Body of Christ,


                          324
                Pulling Down Strongholds


there's another practice that's wreaking havoc in some
churches today.
    A pastor told me recently about a "school of
deliverance" he had attended. I call them "schools of
bondage." I've never seen one of them that didn't turn
into a school of bondage because they teach people to be
devil-conscious and to fear the devil. They're not new. I
saw them crop up years ago.
    The pastor later told me, "I thought it would be a
school, and the ministers would teach on Bible subjects.
But they never taught a thing. For more than four
hours, all they did was holler and yell at the devil at the
top of their voices. They said they were 'tormenting' the
devil. I just sat there and never got a thing in the world
out of it."
    I don't mean to be unkind about it, but I call that
ignorance gone to seed! The people at that "deliverance
school" might as well have been twiddling their thumbs,
saying, "Twinkle, twinkle little star. How I wonder
what you are." Trying to torment a defeated foe by
hollering at him is missing the real battle. The
believer's primary "battle" is with his own unrenewed
mind and is won as the believer stands in his authority
in Christ.
    Some believers seem to think yelling at the devil
shows their authority over him. But the devil doesn't
have to bow to the loudness of a person's voice. He isn't
afraid of noise; he's afraid of the Name of Jesus! He
fears the believer who stands in his authority in Christ.
   The devil doesn't have to cease and desist in his
operations against you based on how loud you can yell
at him. But he does have to stop in every strategy
against you when you exercise your authority in Christ.
You just have to know your rights and privileges in

                           325
                The Triumphant Church


Christ and enforce Jesus' victory over Satan with God's
Word. We are not trying to win the victory over Satan.
Jesus has already won that victory. We are simply
enforcing Jesus' victory with the Word of God in our
lives.
    I heard a tape of a session that was supposedly
"taught" at this "school." The minister said, "The Bible
said that Jesus went into the synagogues and evil
spirits would cry out, 'Have you come to torment us?' So
we are going to torment the devil."
   He was quoting from Mark 5:7 and Luke 8:28. But
in Matthew 8:29 it says, “... behold, they cried out,
saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of
God? art thou come hither to torment us BEFORE THE
TIME?"
    Jesus couldn't "torment" these evil spirits yet, and
neither can we. Until Adam's lease runs out, demons
and evil spirits are here on the earth. But, thank God,
the day is coming when they will be cast into their
eternal abode and be tormented (Rev. 20:1-3).
    Think about it! Why would anyone want to torment
the devil? Jesus has whipped him at the Cross. Because
Satan is a defeated foe, I'm not overly concerned about
him. I know what to do with him if he shows up, glory
to God! I'm more interested in preaching about Jesus so
that people can come out from under the devil's
dominion and learn how to successfully take their stand
against Satan in every test and trial.
    Let's find out what the Bible says and base our
strategy against the kingdom of darkness on scriptural
grounds so we can win the lost in the world for Jesus!
   Search the Scriptures for yourself. Again and again
you will find that Jesus, the twelve disciples, and the


                          326
               Pulling Down Strongholds


Apostle Paul taught believers to preach the Word.
    They taught about the Name of Jesus, and the
authority believers have in that Name over all the
powers of darkness. They taught believers to stand
strong in faith in God's Word because it's the Word that
dispels strongholds in people's lives and thinking. The
anointing on the Word has the power to break any
demonic bondage!




                          327
           Chapter 10
      Praying Scripturally to
      10




      Thwart The Kingdom of
            Darkness
   If believers are not to pull down strongholds in the
sense of doing unscriptural things like warring in
tongues in the heavenlies, then how can we pray so that
our prayers will effect change in our cities and nations?
    First and foremost, the Body of Christ needs to
realize that it’s only the Word of God that grows and
prevails in people’s lives. The Word of God will grow
and prevail over any circumstance, any demon, or any
force of the devil in any person’s life or in any nation if
it is planted in the ground prepared by prayer and
watered by the Word and the Holy Spirit.

    Producing a Crop Through the Word
                and Prayer
    A great revivalist once said, “It is no more
supernatural for believers to have a revival than it is
for farmers to reap a crop.” He meant that the same
principles for sowing and reaping a crop apply in both
the natural and the spiritual realms. A harvest doesn’t
just happen for no reason, and it doesn’t happen
overnight. The farmer prepares the ground and then
plants the seed in the ground, and rain causes the crop
to grow. Finally, the crops are ready to harvest.
   The Bible calls people who are ready to receive the

                           329
                 The Triumphant Church


gospel a spiritual harvest (Matt. 9:38). And the Bible
gives us instructions on how to pull people out of the
kingdom of darkness and get a harvest of souls for the
Kingdom of light. In the natural realm, a crop is
produced from seed. But before the seeds can be
planted, the ground has to be prepared. Then in order
to produce a harvest, after the seed is planted, it also
has to be watered. The same is true in the spiritual
realm.
    Spiritually, we prepare the ground of people’s hearts
through scriptural prayer and sowing the incorruptible
seed of God’s Word (1 Peter 1:23). The Word has to be
sown in people’s hearts through the preaching of the
Word, because it’s the Word that brings light and
illumination to men’s hearts to set them free from the
dominion of the devil (Ps. 119:130).
    The task of sowing the incorruptible Word and
telling people about Jesus' victory over Satan is the
responsibility of every believer, not just preachers
because Jesus said, "Go YE therefore and teach all
nations ..." (Matt. 28:19). The devil has been defeated
and dethroned by Jesus from his place of dominion over
believers, but now believers have to go tell people the
good news.
    Besides, in the Great Commission, Jesus instructed
believers to preach and teach His Word in all nations.
He didn't say, "Go ye therefore and pray to pull down
demonic strongholds in all nations"!
    If believers only prayed in regard to the harvest, but
no one ever sowed the Word, there would never be a
harvest of souls—no one would come out from Satan's
dominion. A person can pray for a crop all year long, but
if he doesn't get out and plant some seed in his garden,
he will come up empty-handed at harvest time. And I

                           330
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


don't care how good the seed is or how well-prepared
the ground is—if there is no water or rain, there will be
no crop and no increase. In the Bible, water is a type of
both the Word and the Holy Spirit.
    James 5:7 says the Husbandman has long patience
for the precious fruit of the earth, until He receives the
early and the latter rain. The rain mentioned in this
verse is a type of the Holy Spirit. And in Zechariah 10:1,
the Bible instructs us to ask the Lord to send the rain—
the spiritual rain of the Holy Spirit: "Ask ye of the Lord
rain in the time of the latter rain...."
     To prepare the ground for the seed of the Word to be
planted, we can pray for an outpouring of the Holy
Spirit upon all nations. But then someone will have to
go preach the gospel in order to set people free because
it is the Word that sets people free (John 8:32). That is
the scriptural way to change nations.
   You are not going to be able to deal with the devil in
nations any other way than by praying according to
God's Word and by sowing the incorruptible seed of
God's Word.
    Therefore, it is scriptural to ask for the rain—the
Holy Spirit—to be poured out upon every nation to
cause the seeds of the Word that have been planted in
people's hearts to grow. Another way to pray
scripturally to pull souls from the kingdom of darkness
is to ask the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers
into the harvest (Matt. 9:38).
   No matter how good the harvest is, if there are no
laborers to reap the harvest, the precious fruit of the
earth will not be gathered in. So just keep asking the
Lord for the rain of the Holy Spirit, keep preaching the
Word to people, and keeping praying for laborers to be
sent forth. Then there will be a harvest of souls that

                           331
                 The Triumphant Church


will be brought into the Kingdom of God. That's how to
scripturally change cities and nations, and because it's
based solidly on God's Word, God will bring the increase
(1 Cor. 3:6).

       Preparing the Ground Through
                   Prayer
    Getting the Word to prevail in people's lives should
be the primary goal of believers as they pray for the
world. If believers would avoid praying in unbiblical
ways and begin praying effectively according to the
Word of God, Satan's strategies in cities and nations
would be thwarted and God's purposes would be
fulfilled to a greater measure on this earth.
    Praying for revival effects change in our cities and
nations by pushing back the darkness. The ministry of
Charles Finney, the great revivalist, gives us insight
into how to prepare the way for revival through prayer
that is based firmly on the Word.
   Finney had revivals in city after city. Sometimes
almost entire cities would get saved when he came and
preached there. That's invading the kingdom of
darkness! Most students of church history would agree
that Finney had the greatest success at soulwinning of
anyone since the Apostle Paul. It's a historical fact that
eighty percent of all Finney's converts remained faithful
to God in their Christian walk. In most of the other
great revivals in history, not even fifty percent of the
converts continued to live for the Lord.
   When asked the secret to his success in the
ministry, Finney simply said, "The secret is prayer. I
always get up at four o'clock every morning and I pray
from four o'clock to eight o'clock in the morning. I've


                           332
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


had some experiences in prayer that indeed alarmed
me. I found myself saying, 'Lord, You don't think we're
not going to have revival here, do You!' And then I
found myself quoting scripture after scripture to the
Lord, reminding Him of His promises."
    When I read the account of how Finney prayed for
revival, I realized Finney was practicing what God
instructed us to do in the Book of Isaiah.
   ISAIAH 43:26
   26 PUT ME IN REMEMBRANCE: LET US
   PLEAD TOGETHER: declare thou, that thou
   mayest be justified.

   You see, Finney pled his case with God for revival in
the cities where he would be preaching based on the
promises in God's Word. He put God in remembrance of
what He had said in His Word. He prayed according to
the Word for revival—for souls to come into the
Kingdom of God. There isn't one account given that
Finney ever pulled down demonic strongholds, prayed
against devils, or dealt with ruling princes over cities,
yet whole towns were won to the Lord where Finney
preached.
    Finney also talked about a man named Father Nash
who supported Finney in prayer. Sometimes Father
Nash would go ahead of Finney to the next city where
Finney would be preaching to prepare the way in prayer
for revival.
   Once when Finney came to a particular city and
began his meetings, a woman came to him and said,
"About a week ago, Father Nash rented a room from
me. After three days, I wondered why he didn't come
out of his room, so I went up to his door and I could
hear Father Nash groaning. I thought something was


                           333
                 The Triumphant Church


wrong with him, so I opened the door and peeked in.
There he was, lying in the middle of the floor, groaning
and praying."
    Finney answered, "Don't worry about Father Nash,
Sister. Just leave him alone. He just has the burden of
intercession to pray for lost souls."
    You see, Father Nash wasn't pulling down
strongholds or fighting demons who were ruling over
cities where Finney was going to be preaching. He was
praying according to Romans 8:26, as the Holy Spirit
helped him pray for lost souls with groanings that could
not be uttered in articulate speech.
   However, we need to realize that the Holy Spirit
may lead a person to pray in private in ways that would
be wrong in a public setting. For instance, many people,
especially if unbelievers are present, wouldn't
understand if a person suddenly got down on the floor
at church and began groaning and carrying on in
prayer.
    But prayer that is in line with the Word prepares
the ground of people's hearts so the Word can be
planted and bear eternal fruit in people's lives. That is
the scriptural way to change cities and nations—not by
spending our time supposedly warring against spiritual
forces ruling over cities and nations that have already
been defeated by Jesus.
   Thousands of souls were won to the Kingdom of God
through Finney's ministry. Finney accomplished that by
praying for souls—the precious fruit of the earth—and
by preaching the Word.
    Let me share an example of a woman I knew who
prepared the way through prayer for many to be
delivered out of the kingdom of darkness. We called her


                          334
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


Mother Howard, and she was a strong woman of prayer.
    When Mother Howard first moved to north-central
Texas years earlier, there were no Full Gospel churches
in any of the towns or cities in that entire region. But
the Lord laid it on her heart to pray that a Full Gospel
church be established in every town and city in that
area.
   So Mother Howard began praying, taking one town
at a time and continuing to pray until a Full Gospel
church was raised up in the town she was praying for.
She'd pray from ten in the morning until mid-afternoon.
Then after supper, she'd begin praying again and
continue until midnight or later, depending on how the
Holy Spirit led her.
    In her prayers Mother Howard wasn't trying to pull
down strongholds or trying to fight the devil. She wasn't
basing her prayers on what the devil was or was not
doing. Like Father Nash, she was praying for souls to
be saved as the Holy Spirit helped her in prayer. She
wasn't yelling at the devil, but she was certainly doing
much damage to the kingdom of darkness. She was
talking to God and asking for souls to be brought into
the Kingdom of God.
   Mother Howard was largely responsible for praying
a church into every city and town in that region of
Texas. She's a good example of how believers are to
pray to help win cities for God by fervent, scriptural
prayer and intercession.

            'I Will Give You the City'
   Biblical prayer and intercession prayed by the
power and the anointing of the Holy Spirit effects
change in cities and nations for the Kingdom of God.


                           335
                  The Triumphant Church


Let me illustrate this. I was preaching in a church once,
and in the middle of my sermon, a spirit of prayer fell
on the whole congregation and everyone just hit the
floor praying. The Unseen One, the Holy Spirit, was
directing the service. We all prayed for quite some time.
    At the end of that time of prayer, the Lord said to
me, "Tell these folks that if they will enter into
intercession and travail for the lost in their city, I'll give
them this city. I'll give it to them, but they will have to
possess it. And the way they possess it is through
intercessory prayer and soul travail for the lost."
   You see, we can intercede on behalf of others with
our understanding, as Finney did when he pled his case
with God using the promises in God's Word. But we
don't always know how to pray for folks as we ought.
That is why we need to be sensitive to pray as the Holy
Spirit leads us and as He takes hold together with us (1
Cor. 14:14; Rom. 8:26). Praying for the lost in this
manner is a part of the scriptural way to win a city for
God. To win a city, you must win souls.
    Winning a city for God doesn't necessarily mean
that every single person in that town would be saved,
because people still have free choice. But prayers and
intercession make it easier for people to yield to God
and to desire to be saved. As a result of the believers
praying for the lost, many came to the Lord.
    In fact, when I went back to that town two years
later, that church was the largest in town, and many,
many souls had been prayed out of the kingdom of
darkness and brought into the Kingdom of God. And the
believers in that church never tried to pull down one
stronghold! They just gave themselves to prayer that
was based on the Word of God and the leading of the
Holy Spirit.

                             336
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


    'Mightily Grew the Word of God and
                 Prevailed'
    How does planting the incorruptible seed—
preaching the Word—pull people out of darkness and
bring increase for the Kingdom of God?
    We saw that in Acts 19, Paul preached the Word of
God in Ephesus and mighty miracles were wrought for
God's glory. People were saved, believers were baptized
in the Holy Spirit and spoke with tongues, the sick were
healed, and those who were oppressed by evil spirits
were delivered.
    All of this happened as the result of Paul preaching
the Word: "So mightily grew THE WORD OF GOD and
prevailed" (Acts 19:20). It was the Word of God that
grew and prevailed in the hearts and lives of the people
of Ephesus and brought them out of the bondage of the
kingdom of darkness.
   If you want to see miracles happen, including people
being set free from demonic oppression and influence,
preach the Word. Put God's Word first, because God's
Word never fails. When you emphasize or exalt
anything other than the Word, you get off on doctrinal
tangents and people aren't set free from the bondages of
Satan. Exalting anything but the Word of God opens a
door to the devil because it gets you sidetracked from
God's purpose for the Church.
    Preach the Word! Establish people in the Word.
Then they will be able to stand in any test or trial Satan
tries to bring their way because they have a solid
foundation for their faith—the Word of the living God.
   Acts 19:20 says it was the Word of God that
prevailed in people's lives. The word "prevail" means to


                           337
                 The Triumphant Church


gain ascendancy through strength or superiority; to
TRIUMPH; to be or become effective or effectual; to
predominate.
    When the Word gains ascendancy in people's hearts,
it has the power to transform their lives and deliver
them from every bondage of the devil. The Word
prevailing in people's lives is the key to the triumphant
Church prevailing over the powers of darkness on this
earth. It is the scriptural way to change cities and
nations for God.
   I read the newsletter of a missionary who has
ministered in the Philippines for many years. His
report of ministering in the Philippines is an example of
how preaching the Word can effect change in a nation.
    His ministry team went to an island that had never
been reached with the gospel, and the people on the
island were in great bondage to Satan. These
missionaries preached the Word to the people, and
many were delivered out of the bondage of darkness.
   Believers could have fasted and prayed for the
people on that island for the rest of their lives, but no
one would have been saved if someone hadn't gone to
the island and preached the Word.
    Believers could have commanded the devil to stop
ruling on that island, but he would have gone right on
ruling because without the knowledge of the Word,
people would have consciously or unconsciously
continued to yield to Satan.
    Without the preaching and teaching of the Word,
the people wouldn't have known they had authority
over Satan themselves and that they no longer had to
be defeated by the devil.
   So effective, scriptural prayer was first made for

                          338
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


those on the island who were in bondage to Satan. But
then someone had to go and plant the incorruptible seed
by preaching the Word to the people so that many,
many people could be born again and delivered out of
the kingdom of darkness.
    The more believers get the Word to prevail, the
more we will see cities and nations changed to the glory
of God. That is the way to stand as the triumphant
Church of the Lord Jesus Christ in the earth, reaching
all nations with the gospel in these last days.

                     Why Pray?
    Although the Bible doesn't teach believers to focus
their praying on fighting demons or pulling down
strongholds over cities or nations, we are instructed to
pray in order to further the Kingdom of God on the
earth.
   Someone might say, "Let's back off from praying for
our cities and nations altogether to avoid all the errors
and extremes about pulling down strongholds and
combating the devil in prayer. Let God do whatever He
wants to do; there's no point in praying."
   But we can not back off from praying for the lost.
The world desperately needs prayer. And the Church
needs prayer.
    Some might even ask, "Why do we have to pray and
intercede for others anyway? Since God is all-powerful,
why doesn't He just save everyone today, since it's His
will that all men be saved?" (1 Tim. 2:4).
    I once read a statement by John Wesley that
answers that question. Wesley said, "It seems that God
is limited by our prayer life. He can do nothing for
humanity unless someone asks Him."

                           339
                 The Triumphant Church


   The Word tells us why that is so.
   JAMES 4:2
   2 ... ye have not, because ye ASK not.

   JOHN 16:23,24
   23 And in that day ye shall ask me nothing.
   Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye
   shall ASK the Father in my name, he will give it
   you.
   24 Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name:
   ASK, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be
   full.

   God waits for His children to ask Him to move in
behalf of the lost. Asking based on God's Word is one
way believers stand in their place of authority in Christ
and enforce Satan's defeat on the earth.

                 Stand in the Gap
    God can only move on this earth as His people ask
Him to move. God is longing today for someone who will
make up the hedge and stand in the gap before Him
and intercede for souls in every nation. That's the
scriptural way to win cities and nations for God.
   EZEKIEL 22:30
   30 And I sought for a man among them, that
   should make up the hedge, and STAND IN THE
   GAP before me for the land, THAT I SHOULD
   NOT DESTROY IT: but I found none.

   In these verses, God said He had to destroy the land
because as a just God, He had to pronounce a penalty
on sin. God's penalty for sin wasn't unjust because the
people had brought judgment upon themselves by their
own sin: “... THEIR OWN WAY have I recompensed
upon their heads ..." (v. 31).

                          340
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


    This scripture implies that if God could have found
someone to stand in the gap and make up the hedge and
intercede for the land, He wouldn't have had to bring
judgment on the people.
   That goes back to what John Wesley said, "It seems
God can do nothing for humanity unless someone asks
Him to do it."
    If someone would just ask Him. Think about that!
God didn't say we had to go out and try to fight Satan, a
defeated foe. These verses say that if God's covenant
children would just ask Him to move on the earth, He
would hear and answer their prayers. Satan is no
match for God!
    The unsaved people of the world are dominated and
ruled by the devil—not God. Therefore, they are
destined to have "their own way recompensed upon
their heads" unless they hear and receive the truth of
the gospel and repent.
   God looks for those who will boldly ask Him to hold
back judgment and give the unsaved more time to
repent and come to the knowledge of the truth.
   Then it's our responsibility to preach the gospel so
people can be saved and teach them their position of
authority in Christ over the devil.
   You see, these are the principles in God's Word on
which we are to build doctrines for prayer and for
taking cities and nations for God. God watches over His
Word to perform it—not doctrines that are built on
experiences or isolated texts taken to the extreme (Isa.
55:11; Mark 16:20).

       Praying for Those in Authority
   Another scriptural way to pray to win cities and

                           341
                 The Triumphant Church


nations for God is found in the Book of Timothy. We are
instructed to pray for those in authority. It stands to
reason that if people in positions of authority in a
nation change to God's glory, then God has more liberty
to move in that nation, so the devil's plans are thwarted
and men are saved.
   1 TIMOTHY 2:1,2,4
   1 I exhort therefore, that, FIRST OF ALL,
   supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
   of thanks, be made for ALL MEN;
   2 For KINGS, and for ALL THAT ARE IN
   AUTHORITY; that we may lead a quiet and
   peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
   4 [God] Who will have all men to be saved and to
   come unto the knowledge of the truth.

   Notice that Paul said in First Timothy 2:1, “...
FIRST OF ALL...." That means we are to pray for all
men and for all those in authority before we pray for
ourselves or our own families.
    Praying according to the Word and putting first
things first always produces results. Praying according
to the latest spiritual "fad" that's not based firmly on
the Word of God will never produce lasting or eternal
results.
    As we pray for those in authority, the Bible says we
will effect changes in the nations of this world “... that
we may lead A QUIET AND PEACEABLE LIFE ...” (1
Tim. 2:2).
    Yes, there are ruling spirits over cities and nations
that influence people who are in authority. Although we
can't "pull down" those demonic strongholds once and
for all, as we pray for the leaders of nations, we can
thwart and render inoperative the devil's strategies on
the earth and cause God's purposes to prevail.

                           342
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


    But praying for those in authority doesn't mean we
are to pray that the politicians in our favorite political
party will be voted into office. We can't judge by
political party alone which candidate is best to fill the
leadership positions in our nation.
    In other words, we don't need to get involved with
personalities in praying for our government; we just
need to pray that the right candidate be elected to
office. We may all have our opinion who is the right one
for office, but only God knows for sure. Therefore, we
just need to pray that God will have His way in the
matter.
    God wants us to pray for those in authority so there
will be peace in our nations. Then we can preach the
gospel undisturbed. As long as the devil has nations in
an upheaval, we can't lead a quiet and peaceable life
and preach the gospel unhindered to the ends of the
earth.
   2 THESSALONIANS 3:1,2
   1 Finally, brethren, pray for us, that THE WORD
   OF THE LORD MAY HAVE FREE COURSE, and
   be glorified, even as it is with you:
   2 And that we may be DELIVERED FROM
   UNREASONABLE AND WICKED MEN: for all
   men have not faith.

    When we pray, God will deliver us from
"unreasonable and wicked men" in every area and
sector in our nation so the Word of God will have free
course.
    So the most important reason God wants us to pray
for the leaders of nations is so the gospel can be
preached and people can be delivered out of the
kingdom of darkness. God's plan and purpose is for the
Church to preach the gospel to every nation: "And this

                           343
                 The Triumphant Church


gospel of the kingdom SHALL BE PREACHED in all
the world for a witness unto ALL NATIONS; and then
shall the end come" (Matt. 24:14). This is the scriptural
way we render the devil's work inoperative upon the
earth.
    When the gospel has been preached to all nations,
the Bible says the end shall come. The devil doesn't
want the end to come, because he knows when the end
comes, he's through! Therefore, Satan is going to try to
throw up every roadblock he can to prevent the gospel
from being preached in all the world (Mark 16:15). In
times of turmoil and war, it's more difficult to spread
the gospel. That's why the devil uses unbelievers, whose
minds he has blinded (2 Cor. 4:4), to stir up trouble.
Satan wants to try to stop the work of God from going
forth.
    However, it's up to Christians whether or not the
devil succeeds in his individual strategies against them.
As we obey the Bible's instruction to pray for those in
authority and for the nations of the world, we can help
thwart Satan's plans and instead fulfill God's purposes
on the earth.
    Christians have authority to pray in Jesus' Name
and change things in their country, no matter what
country they are living in. When we pray, we give God
permission to move and rule in the situation instead of
Satan, the god of this world, no matter what the
situation is. When Christians stand in their place of
delegated authority in prayer in Jesus' Name, God
brings many into His Kingdom. We don't fight the devil
to gain this authority. The authority has already been
given to us in the Name of Jesus (Matt. 28:18-20). When
we take our stand in prayer, we are simply exercising
the authority Jesus has obtained for us.


                          344
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


    We've seen an example of the Word of God
prevailing over the strongholds of Satan in the decline
of Communism in the Eastern Bloc nations. In 1983,
the Lord began to impress upon me to pray according to
James 5:7: “... the husbandman waiteth for the precious
fruit of the EARTH... until he receive the early and
latter rain.”
   We were conducting a weekly prayer meeting here
at RHEMA at that time, and I announced, "I believe
we've missed it in how we've been praying for the
Eastern Bloc nations. I think many of us have
unconsciously marked off the Communist countries as
unreachable for the gospel. We've prayed for the
Christians there, but how many of us have prayed for
the Communist leaders?”
   "But the Bible doesn't say the Lord is waiting for the
precious fruit of the United States or the Free World.
He is waiting for the precious fruit of the earth, and
that includes the Communist countries. That means
before Jesus comes again, there has to be a revival
behind the Iron Curtain and the Bamboo Curtain, for
the Bible says there will be a gathering of the harvest
from the whole earth."
    So week after week during our prayer meetings, we
prayed for the Communist nations, as well as for the
other nations of the world. We asked the Lord to send
forth the rain—the outpouring of the Holy Spirit—upon
those nations, according to Zechariah 10:1: "Ask ye of
the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain...." We prayed
for the leaders of the Communist nations according to
First Timothy 2:1 and 2. And we asked for the Lord of
the harvest to send forth laborers (Matt. 9:38).
   As we direct our prayers to the Lord of the harvest,
we take our position on the earth as the triumphant

                           345
                 The Triumphant Church


Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, and Satan's dominion
over the lives of the lost begins to be weakened. That's
how we deliver people out of the bondage of the enemy.
When we pray for those in authority in the cities and
nations of the world, we weaken the effectiveness of
Satan's kingdom in those cities and nations. When we
pray, God can have His way in those countries instead
of Satan.
    I am well satisfied that the changes we have
witnessed in the Eastern Bloc nations have occurred
because many believers throughout the world prayed
scripturally for these nations by the prompting of the
Holy Spirit.
    As Christians, we have the authority in Jesus' Name
to bind the power of the devil over the political scene of
a nation. We have the right to demand that Satan take
his hands off the government and the economic and
social scene of a nation. We can bind every foul spirit
that is affecting these areas and command them to stop
in their maneuvers and cease and desist in their actions
against us (Matt. 18:18; John 14:13,14).
    Satan's strategies against us on the earth can be
stopped in every encounter, and God's purposes can be
fulfilled, as Christians stand in their place of authority
in Christ on behalf of the nations of the world by
praying for those in authority.
   Therefore, let's put first things first so God, not
Satan, can have dominion in our city or nation. Before
you pray for your family, pray first for those in
authority, so that " . . . we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty" (1 Tim. 2:2).
This is one way we can keep Satan from taking
advantage of us, “... for we are not ignorant of his
devices” (2 Cor. 2:11).

                           346
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


    The reason we haven't been more effective over the
powers of darkness is that we haven't taken our rightful
place in Christ and we haven't based our prayers
securely on the Word of God. And we haven't put first
things first as much as we should have.

           The Visions of the 'Frogs'
   I had two very similar and unusual spiritual
experiences, one in 1970 and the other in 1979, that
showed me how real our responsibility is to pray for our
nation and for the world. In both visions I saw three
huge, black, frog-like creatures coming up out of the
Atlantic Ocean. They looked like huge frogs except they
were much larger—about the size of whales.
   In the first vision in 1970, I saw these dark beings
come up out of the Atlantic, and they seemed to leap all
the way across the land. In the second vision in 1979, I
again saw three frog-like creatures, and one of those
creatures came up out of the water and looked like it
was about to land on our shores.
   You need to know how to interpret spiritual visions.
Because these creatures came out of the ocean doesn't
mean they came up out of a literal ocean. From Genesis
to Revelation, "seas" or "waters" often symbolizes a
multitude of people.
    In the first vision, I knew that the three frog-like
creatures leaping across our country meant that three
strategies of the devil would arise out of the multitude
of peoples against our nation. The first strategy of
Satan would be riots and disturbances. The second,
would be political upheaval (Watergate, as it turned
out). And the third, problems in the economic sector of
our nation.


                           347
                 The Triumphant Church


   These evil strategies from the enemy don't arise
from the Christian population; they come from the
masses of those walking in darkness because sinners
are held bondage and dominated by the devil in the
kingdom of darkness.
   In the second vision in 1979, Jesus said to me, "If
the Christians of this nation had done what I told them
to do in My Word and had prayed for the leaders of
their country, they could have kept those evil spirits
you saw in 1970 from operating in this nation. None of
those upheavals would have occurred in your nation.
You would not have had the political, social, and
economic disturbances in this nation, and the President
never would have made the mistakes he made. In fact,
I'm holding the Church responsible for the President's
mistakes."
   When I heard Jesus say that, I cried out, "My God!"
and began to weep. Jesus continued, "Yes, the Church is
responsible before God Almighty. I know when you tell
that to some Christians, they will laugh. But you wait
until they stand before My Judgment Seat and see if
they laugh when they are the ones who will receive the
judgment."
   Jesus was saying that Christians could have
stopped those evil strategies of the devil by taking their
place in prayer based on the Word of God. Christians
have authority on the earth in Jesus' Name, and if
Christians had prayed for those in authority, America
would not have had the riots or the political and
economic upheavals we experienced in our nation in the
1970s.
    In this vision in 1979, I saw those other frogs about
to land on our shores again, and Jesus said to me, "You
can see that three similar evil strategies of the devil are

                           348
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


about to happen again in this nation. First, unless
Christians pray, there will arise another time of riots
and tumults and disturbances all across the nation,
coming from different causes than the disturbances of
the early 1970s.
   "Second," He said, "something is about to happen to
your President that should not happen and will not
happen if Christians will pray, and take authority over
the devil's strategies and bind his works in My Name.
And third, unless Christians pray, there is something
about to happen that will bring further trouble in the
economic scene and in the financial structure of this
nation."
    Jesus concluded, "Once again, Christians can stop
all three of these strategies of the devil against this
nation. They can stop the upheaval through riots,
tumults, and disturbances in the social structure. They
can stop the upheaval and the activity of the devil in
the political scene of their nation. And they can stop the
devil from disrupting the financial scene of their
nation."
    Many Christians did pray and the plan of the enemy
was greatly averted and thwarted. Because Christians
stood in their place of authority in Jesus' Name and
began to pray and exercise their authority over the
devil, God intervened on our behalf.

         Changing Nations Biblically
    We're going to look at two men in the Old Testament
who changed their nations through prayer. If you want
to see how people of the Bible changed nations, study
their prayer lives and see how they prayed. You'll find
they prayed in line with the Word.


                           349
                 The Triumphant Church


    Abraham's intercession for Sodom and Gomorrah is
an example of how God's covenant people can intercede
and affect the course of events in this world so that
God's purposes can be fulfilled—regardless of Satan's
strongholds over cities and nations (Gen. 18:16-33).
   How did Abraham effect change in his nation? Did
he deal with demons and devils? Did he try to pull down
demonic strongholds? No, Abraham pled his case with
God (Gen. 18:16-33; Isa. 43:26). He talked to God about
Sodom and Gomorrah.
    Of course, there were wicked spirits in Sodom and
Gomorrah; the judgment of God was about to come
upon those cities because of the wickedness (Gen.
19:13). But Abraham didn't fight with the ruling spirits
over the cities in his efforts to see the cities spared.
Abraham made intercession to the Lord regarding the
cities, and the Lord responded to Abraham by sparing
the righteous.
      Abraham's intercession teaches us that it doesn't
take a great number of believers to effect changes on
this earth through prayer. The Bible says, “... if TWO of
you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that
they shall ask, IT SH ALL BE DONE FOR
THEM ..." (Matt. 18:19). And in Ezekiel 22:30 it says,
" . . . I sought for A man.. .." One person can make all
the difference.
    Besides, we are under an even better Covenant than
Abraham was. Abraham didn't have authority over the
devil, as we do under the New Covenant in Jesus'
Name. If God moved according to Abraham's
intercession under the Old Covenant, how much more
under the New Covenant will God move in our cities
and nations just because believers ask Him to—
regardless of the strategies of Satan!

                          350
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


   Christians could accomplish so much more for the
Kingdom of God if they would only exercise the
authority they have in the Name of Jesus and enforce
the devil's defeat on this earth. The majority of
Christians don't take advantage of the authority in
prayer that belongs to them. If they did, much damage
would be done to the kingdom of darkness and many
souls would be won to God.
    Christians can change the political, economic, and
social scenes in cities and nations through scriptural
prayer. Christians can hold back judgment on the
unsaved, giving them more time to hear the gospel and
repent. Whenever God's people take their place in
prayer just as Abraham did for the nations of the world,
they can change things on this earth to the glory of God
and thwart the plans of the enemy in every encounter.

       Daniel's Prayer Life: Did Daniel
          Make 'War' on the Devil?
   In Daniel's prayer life, we find another biblical
example of a covenant man changing the course of
events in a nation through prayer. If Daniel could
change the entire course of the nation of Israel by his
prayers regardless of satanic strongholds, then we need
to see exactly how he prayed. We will find in every
recorded instance that Daniel prayed to God. Not one
time does the Bible say that Daniel 'warred' against the
devil or that he ever dealt directly with principalities
and powers.
   The following passages show us Daniel's prayer life.
   DANIEL 10:2,3,5,6,12-14
   2 In those days I Daniel was mourning [fasting]
   three full weeks.


                           351
                The Triumphant Church

   3 I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor
   wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at
   all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled....
   5 Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and
   behold, a certain man clothed in linen, whose
   loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz:
   6 His body also was like the beryl, and his face
   as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as
   lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in
   colour to polished brass, and the voice of his
   words like the voice of a multitude....
   12 Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for
   FROM THE FIRST DAY that thou didst set thine
   heart to understand, and to chasten thyself
   before thy God, THY WORDS WERE HEARD,
   and I AM COME FOR THY WORDS.
   13 But the PRINCE OF THE KINGDOM OF
   PERSIA [wicked spirits in the heavenlies]
   withstood me one and twenty days: but, lo,
   Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help
   me; and I remained there with the kings of
   Persia.
   14 Now I am come to make thee understand
   what shall befall thy people in the latter days:
   for yet the vision is for many days.

    Both Ezekiel and Jeremiah had prophesied that God
would deliver Israel out of Babylon. Daniel was one of
the many Hebrew exiles held captive in Babylon at the
time. One day Daniel read those prophecies about
Israel's release from captivity, and he began seeking
God about what God had promised.
   It was the Word of God that stirred Daniel up to
pray and seek God on behalf of his people. And as
Daniel sought the Lord, God not only showed him what
would happen in the immediate future, but He also
showed Daniel certain kingdoms that would decline and


                         352
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


other kingdoms that would arise in the future.

     Daniel Prayed to God, Not Against
                 the Devil
   When you look at what the Word of God says, you
see that Daniel did not personally deal with the prince
that was ruling in the heavenlies in prayer. Daniel
prayed to God.
   On the other hand, there is a sense in which Daniel
dealt with evil spirits indirectly in prayer because when
Daniel prayed, God heard and answered him, and God's
Kingdom was advanced and Satan's kingdom suffered a
defeat. And as a result of Daniel's prayer to God there
was fighting in the heavenlies. But Daniel wasn't doing
the fighting.
   You see, when the Body of Christ prays, there is
much more going on in the heavenlies—the first and
second heaven where demons operate—than we realize.
   And it seems that whether or not the angels prevail
in the heavenlies is up to us here on earth and the
words and prayers we speak about the situation.
Remember, the angel said to Daniel, “... thy words were
heard, and I AM COME FOR THY WORDS" (Dan.
10:12).
    When Daniel prayed, he was not trying to defeat the
devil. Daniel was putting God in remembrance of His
Word (Isa. 43:26). However, indirectly Daniel's prayers
affected the principalities and powers and caused a
battle that took place in the heavenlies as the forces of
darkness tried to keep Daniel's answer from reaching
him.
    Daniel must have realized his answer was not
getting through, so he continued to fast and seek God.

                           353
                The Triumphant Church


What if Daniel had given up in prayer? The angel may
not have prevailed in the heavenlies. But Daniel didn't
give up in prayer, and as a result of answered prayer
situations were changed in that nation to the glory of
God.
    Because of Daniel's prayer to God, even though
there was great wickedness and many strongholds of
Satan prevailing in that nation, Israel was released
from captivity in Babylon. But it was God's Word
spoken by Daniel in prayer to God that moved and
changed those circumstances. It wasn't Daniel's direct
combat in prayer with spiritual wickedness in high
places that changed things in that nation, because we
don't see anywhere that Daniel prayed against evil
spirits in high places.

          'I Am Come for Thy Words'
    This passage in Daniel 10 gives us insight about the
power our words and prayer have in affecting the
spiritual realm as God moves to answer our prayer in
the natural realm. We can see this in what the angel
said to Daniel: “... from the first day ... THY WORDS
WERE HEARD, and I AM COME FOR THY WORDS”
(Dan. 10:12).
   That's a very interesting statement: "I am come for
thy words." It was not words that were spoken in
Heaven that sent the angel to Daniel or put the angel of
God to work. It was words spoken on earth by someone
praying in line with God's Word that put the angel to
work against the powers of darkness (Ps. 103:20).
   That tells us that whether or not the victory is
experienced on earth has to do with God's children
taking their rightful place of authority in Christ and


                          354
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


praying in line with God's Word.
   Also, under the Old Covenant, Daniel had no
authority in Jesus' Name to stand against Satan or to
bind the operations and strategies of principalities and
powers because Jesus hadn't come yet and defeated
Satan. Authority over demons hadn't been given yet,
because Jesus hadn't died yet and risen from the dead
and delegated His authority to the Church.
    Therefore, Daniel couldn't take authority over the
strategies of the devil as believers can under the New
Covenant. Today under the New Covenant, we have a
better covenant established upon better promises than
Daniel did. We can take authority over Satan's
strategies and render them inoperative in the earth. We
don't fight to gain that authority, we simply take our
stand in the authority Christ has already given us.

     The Role of Prayer in Dealing With
         the Kingdom of Darkness
   As believers pray according to the Word, God will
move on our behalf. And as we pray according to the
Word, it seems as though our prayers actually push
back the effects of the powers of darkness and allow the
Word to prevail, so we can preach the gospel.
    Let me share an example that shows the power of
scriptural prayer to push back the kingdom of darkness
and change the course of events in a nation. Several
years ago the ambassador of an African nation visited
RHEMA with a personal message of thanks from the
prime minister of his nation.
  A few months before that, a ministry team from
RHEMA had visited that African country at a time
when the nation was on the verge of a revolution. The


                           355
                 The Triumphant Church


RHEMA team met with the leaders of the nation and
talked with them about the truth of Jesus Christ and
were invited to a meeting of the Parliament to pray for
a peaceful solution to the crisis in their nation.
    God answered their prayers, and the crisis was
resolved without bloodshed. The prime minister sent us
the message, "The truth your people brought to our
country about Jesus Christ saved our land from a blood
bath." You see, the devil wanted to cause a bloody
revolution. But when believers stood in their authority
in the Name of Jesus, bound the works of the enemy,
and then preached the gospel to the people, Satan's
strategy was thwarted.
   But the ambassador from that African nation told
us, "We can certainly tell the difference when
Christians pray for our country and its leaders. When
they take their place in prayer it seems like the enemy's
opposition is lifted. But if believers let up and stop
praying, the effects of the forces of darkness just come
creeping back in."
   Praying for those in authority and for the nations of
the world has to be a continual practice for believers.
That's one way to cooperate with God's will so it can
prevail in situations. Praying for those in authority is
one way to dispel demonic hindrances that keep the
Word from prevailing in people's lives.
    We can't dispel the devil and his demons from the
earth, or cast them into the abyss before their time of
final judgment (Rev. 20:3). But through scriptural
prayer we can keep the forces of darkness at bay, so to
speak, so that the gospel can have free course and
people's hearts will be receptive to the Word of God. The
light keeps darkness pushed back and dispels the
darkness so people will be receptive to the gospel. For

                          356
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


example, when you enter into a dark room and you turn
on the light switch, the light dispels the darkness.
Darkness doesn't exist where there is light!
    The Bible says that the devil tries to blind the minds
of those who would believe: “... the god of this world
HATH BLINDED THE MINDS of them which believe
not, lest the LIGHT of the glorious gospel of Christ, who
is the image of God, should shine unto them” (2 Cor.
4:4). By preaching the Word and praying for souls to
come into the Kingdom of God, we push back and dispel
the darkness so people can receive the gospel and get
saved.

     Binding the First Three Classes of
             Demons on Earth
    Remember I told you that when Jesus appeared to
me in the vision in 1952, He said, "You take authority
over the first three classes of demons, and I'll take care
of spiritual wickedness in high places."
    Principalities, powers, and the rulers of the
darkness of this world are the classes of demons which
directly affect our personal lives because they rule in
our domain, so to speak. Those are the ones we are to
bind and take authority over on earth in the Name of
Jesus. And if we exercise our authority in Christ, Jesus
will deal with spiritual wickedness in high places.
    In Matthew 18:18 when Jesus said, "... Whatsoever
ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven ... ,"
Jesus wasn't talking about binding a principality or a
power up in God's Heaven, because there is nothing in
God's realm that needs to be bound. No, Jesus was
talking about the first heaven or the second heaven,
because that's where these evil powers are at work.


                           357
                 The Triumphant Church


    Principalities and powers keep ruling in this realm
on earth because they are able to operate through
unbelievers or through ignorant and disobedient
believers. But believers can stop principalities, powers,
and the rulers of the darkness of this world in their
operations in Jesus' Name as they exercise their
authority in Christ.
    Binding the devil in his operations against us is the
scriptural way to deal with evil spirits ruling in the
heavenlies.
    Let me give you an illustration of scripturally
dealing with evil spirits that occurred in my own life. I
was preaching in one of our larger cities, and the Spirit
of the Lord came upon me and directed me how to pray
for this particular situation.
    I spoke out by the unction and anointing of the Holy
Spirit: "You foul spirit in the heavenlies that would
come against our nation and government, cease and
desist in your operations against us. You foul demons,
all three of you that inhabit this city, I command you to
cease and desist in your maneuvers in Jesus' Name.
Take your hands off that man in political office. Take
your hands off that group of men in authority. Stop now
in the Name of Jesus. You are a defeated foe, and in the
Name of Jesus, away you must go!"
    I prayed that way according to the direction and
unction of the Holy Spirit. I had no idea what was going
on in that city at that time. But the Holy Spirit directed
me, and shortly after this occurred, a major political
leader in that city was removed from office because of
corruption and vice.
   And as a result of taking authority over the works of
the devil in that city by the power of the Holy Spirit,
soon afterwards judgment fell upon other corrupt

                           358
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


political figures, and many in key positions in
governmental offices were removed from office at that
time.
    I dealt scripturally by the unction of the Holy Spirit
with these evil spirits that were ruling in the unseen
realm. Then in the seen realm in that city, corrupt
political leaders were exposed and removed from
political office.

            Limits to Our Authority
    A person's authority in the natural realm and in the
spiritual realm can only be exercised so far. For
example, a believer has authority over the powers of
darkness in his own home and for his own kinfolk (Acts
16:15,31; Matt. 8:1-13). But when a believer gets out
beyond his own authority or jurisdiction as he prays for
others, he'll have to get their permission in order to
exercise any spiritual authority in their behalf.
    That's the reason Jesus told us to pray in agreement
(Matt. 18:19), and get both parties to agree together on
God's Word. If we pray beyond our realm of authority
for someone else, that person needs to be in agreement
with us so our prayers can be effectual.
    We also need to understand the limitations of our
authority over Satan's kingdom if we are to deal
effectively with the devil. For instance, we have the
authority to break the power of the devil over people's
lives in the Name of Jesus (Matt. 18:18,19; Phil. 2:9,10)
and make it easier for them to accept Christ. But they
still have free choice and can choose to accept Jesus or
reject Him. By breaking the power of the devil over a
person's life then that person is unhindered from
Satan's influence so he can make a free decision for


                           359
                 The Triumphant Church


Christ.
    But we do not have Scripture for breaking the power
of the devil over an entire city once and for all time,
because a city is composed of people. People have free
choice, and they can choose who they will serve—Satan
or God—and in every city many people choose to serve
Satan and to continually yield to him. But we can push
back the influence of darkness in prayer so that the
Word has an opportunity to prevail in people's hearts
and lives through the preaching of the gospel.
    By the same principle, there are limitations to how
the believer can exercise his authority in regard to
demon activity. In other words, I can deal with the devil
in my own life. But I can't necessarily deal with the
devil in someone else's life unless that person gives me
authority to do so. He may want the devil in his life; he
may love the works of darkness and not want to come
into the light. Every person has the right to choose
whom he will serve, and you won't be able to violate his
will.
    We make a mistake when we try to take the rightful
authority we have in our own lives in Jesus' Name and
try to exercise it in someone else's life. We don't have
that kind of authority. We can run the devil off from our
own lives, but we can't always run the devil out of
someone else's life. A person's will has a lot to do with
his own deliverance.
    Let me give you an example in the natural realm. I
can handle my own finances, but I can't handle your
finances unless you give me that authority. Well,
spiritual things are just as real as natural things. But
when it comes to spiritual things, it seems we think we
can intrude into other people's lives without their
consent. And sometimes people act like they are giving

                          360
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


their consent, but their heart is not really in agreement.
And unless people give their consent, you won't be able
to get them delivered unless you have a supernatural
move of God's Spirit as Paul did in Acts 16.
   But as long as a person's own mentality and will are
at work and he can control himself, he has a lot to do
with his own deliverance. That's why we need to teach
people their own responsibility in dealing with the
devil, which is to stay full of the Word and full of the
Holy Spirit and learn to stand against the devil for
themselves. And if people do come to you for help, you
need to teach them how to bind the devil and stand
against him for themselves.
   For example, when folks come to me for help, I can
usually help them because by coming to me for help,
they are giving me permission and authority to help
them. And as long as they are in control enough
mentally to give me that authority, I can help them.
Otherwise, I'd need a supernatural gift of the Spirit in
operation to set them free.
    Smith Wigglesworth tells a story which helps
illustrate  the    believer's  realm   of   authority.
Wigglesworth traveled by ship from the United States
back to England, and a stranger occupied the same
cabin with him. It was a young man, and he was sick in
bed when Wigglesworth entered the cabin.
    The man was just skin and bones, and he told
Wigglesworth, "I'm going to England. My father has
just died, and I've inherited his estate. But I'll just
drink it up; I'll lose it all in gambling and drinking. I've
drunk so much that I can't eat anything; I've got ulcers
of the stomach."
   Wigglesworth had never met this man before. But
Wigglesworth said, "Just say the word, and I can get

                            361
                 The Triumphant Church


you delivered." The man said, "Yes, I want to be
delivered." Wigglesworth laid hands on him and cast an
evil spirit out of him, and the fellow was instantly
healed. After that, the young man was totally set free
and could eat every meal while he was on board that
ship.
    There's a scriptural principle involved here.
Wigglesworth said to him, "Just say the word." You see,
even though Wigglesworth had the ability in Jesus'
Name to set the man free, he didn't have the authority
to do anything for him until the young man gave him
permission or authority to deal with the devil in his life.
Until the man gave Wigglesworth permission,
Wigglesworth couldn't help him.
    You can't make people accept Christ or make anyone
want to be delivered or to choose what God has for
them, because people have free will. Yes, you can pray
for them and bind the power of the devil over their
lives, and it gives them an opportunity to make a choice
unhindered by Satan's influence. But they still have
free choice.
   For example, a man brought his wife to one of my
meetings for deliverance. He brought her up to the
healing line, and when I prayed for her, I knew by the
Spirit of God that an evil spirit had gotten ahold of her
mind. I also knew that if she wanted to be delivered,
she could be.
    Then God revealed to me exactly what had made her
lose her mind in the first place. She had heard a well-
known preacher say that God had spoken to him in an
audible voice. When she heard that, she began to seek
voices—not God, but voices—until finally she became
insane, and she had to be committed to an asylum.
   God also revealed to me that her husband had

                           362
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


brought her to several ministers for deliverance. But
she hadn't been delivered, so her husband had gotten
mad at every minister. I knew all that by the revelation
of the Holy Ghost.
    Then her husband brought her to my meeting.
However, I knew that unless she wanted to get rid of
that evil spirit and stop hearing those voices, I wouldn't
be able to get her delivered either, and then her
husband would get mad at me. So I didn't minister to
her in the healing line; I waited until I'd had an
opportunity to talk to both this woman and her husband
after the service.
    I told this couple exactly what the Lord revealed to
me. This woman had been out of the asylum for a while,
but her husband was going to take her back again
because her mind had become confused again. However,
the woman could understand what was said to her, so I
told her, "Sister, as long as you want to hear those
voices, you're going to hear them. But if you want to be
delivered, you can be."
    She replied, "No, I want to go on hearing these
voices."
    Now if her mind wasn't working properly, and
someone in authority such as her husband gave me
permission, I could have cast that evil spirit out of her
mind. Or if the Holy Spirit moved supernaturally by a
gift of the Spirit, I could have dealt with that evil spirit
supernaturally.
    But her mind was clear enough for her to make a
rational choice, and she wanted to hear those voices, so
there was nothing I could do. I couldn't violate her free
will. God wouldn't violate her free will either. But
anytime she wanted to be delivered, she could be
through the power in the Name of Jesus.

                            363
                 The Triumphant Church


   There is a principle here that Christians need to
realize about the limitation of our authority over the
devil in other people's lives. The mind is the door to the
heart.
    If a person's mentality is such that you can
communicate with him, and he gives you permission,
you can deal with evil spirits in his life. But if the
person doesn't give you permission, or if he wants to
keep evil spirits, you won't be able to deal with the devil
in his life.
    If a person's mind is not functioning properly and he
can't give you permission, then you can help him if the
Lord gives you a supernatural operation of a gift of the
Spirit to deal with the evil spirit that's harassing him.
Or if the person can sit under the teaching of the Word
for a period of time, he can be set free.
    But the point I'm making is that there are limits to
our authority in the spiritual realm when it comes to
dealing with the devil in the lives of other people, just
as there are limits to our authority in the natural realm
when it comes to dealing with other people.
    Some believers make the mistake of taking one
scripture, "These signs shall follow them that believe—
in My Name they'll cast out devils," and they try to cast
the devil out of everyone they meet.
    But you see, you cannot go around exercising
authority over everyone you meet. Jesus didn't do that
when He walked upon this earth. Neither did the
apostles. Therefore, it couldn't be right for us to do it
either. In fact, there's no pattern in the New Testament
for trying to indiscriminately cast devils out of everyone
we meet.
   Many times when well-meaning Christians see the


                           364
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


authority they possess in Jesus' Name, they get carried
away in their excitement and start believing they can
cast the devil out of everyone. They think, I AM
someone. I DO have power. I CAN work miracles or I
CAN work in the supernatural realm. No, they can't
work the supernatural power of God on their own! No
one can. The Holy Ghost is the Wonder Worker, not
man. And we need to depend on Him to lead us in
wisdom according to the Word in our dealings with the
devil.
    So, you see, there are limits to our authority in
dealing with the devil in the lives of others. But what
about in our own personal lives? For example, I've had
believers ask me how much authority they have in
keeping demons and devils off their own property.
Believers do have authority over evil spirits that try to
come on their property. In fact, despite limits to our
authority, I'm convinced that the Church of the Lord
Jesus Christ has more authority than most believers
realize!
   Let me share an incident that happened to Ernie
Reb, a missionary to the Philippines, regarding devils
on his property. Brother Reb had moved to an island
that was supposed to be the very stronghold of Satan.
    Brother Reb was building a home on the island, and
during the construction, one of the carpenters started
hollering. Brother Reb went to see what was wrong. The
fellow was thrashing around like he was wrestling with
something, yelling, "Get him off of me! Get him off of
me!"
    Brother Reb said, "I saw something rip his pants
leg. Tooth-marks appeared, and the wound started
bleeding. All this time he was hollering, 'Get him off of
me!' I realized it had to be a devil. I said, 'I command

                           365
                  The Triumphant Church


you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ to leave him!
This is my property. You have no right on my
property!'"
    When Brother Reb told the demon to leave, it ran
off. Brother Reb told me that He never did see the
demon, but the other man saw it leave. After that, the
other carpenters were afraid to work here. The witch
doctor came, saying he wanted to sacrifice a pig and a
chicken; their blood was supposed to appease the
demons.
   Brother Reb told the witch doctor, "No, you won't
come on my property. You won't sacrifice anything on
my property! There are no evil spirits here. I told them
not to come back, and they won't return or set foot on
my property. Tell that carpenter to come back to work.
That won't happen again."
    You see, those demons knew Brother Reb, and they
recognized that he knew his authority in Christ. And if
you are a believer, the demons know you. They'll run
from you if you exercise your authority in Christ. But if
you don't exercise your authority, they'll take advantage
of you because they are out to kill, steal, and destroy
John 10:10).
    The witch doctor told Brother Reb, "If that man
comes back to work and the devil jumps on him and
kills him, you'll be responsible. He has a wife and
several children. If he's killed, you'll have to take care of
them."
    Brother Reb said, "Tell him to come back to work.
Those devils won't attack him anymore. I have
forbidden them to come on my property, just like I'm
forbidding you to come on my property." The carpenter
came back to work after his leg healed and was never
attacked again.

                            366
  Praying Scripturally to Thwart The Kingdom of Darkness


   Brother Reb's experience shows that we definitely
do have authority over the devil when he tries to
encroach or trespass on our property. When we boldly
bind the devil's works, he has to cease and desist in his
operations against us.
    The devil has no right to trespass on God's property.
But how much authority over the devil do we have
when we are on Satan's territory? If you're on the
devil's territory out of disobedience, ignorance, or
curiosity, he's got a right to jump on you. If you are on
his territory, you won't be able to keep the devil from
attacking you.
   Believers have authority over the devil on their own
property, and they have authority when they are
preaching the gospel on the devil's territory by the
leading and direction of the Holy Spirit.
    For example, missionaries are always invading the
devil's territory with the good news of the gospel, and
they have authority over him in the Name of Jesus. But
if believers go on the devil's territory because they are
walking in disobedience and against the light of God's
Word, they give the devil a legal right to attack them.
   Yes, we have to deal with the devil. He still rules in
the darkness, and we can't stop him from ruling as the
god of this world. But we can bind him in his operations
against us.
    And we can preach the truth to people to let them
know they don't have to be dominated by the devil.
Through biblical prayer and preaching the Word, we
can help bring people out of the kingdom of darkness
into the Kingdom of God. That's how we scripturally
turn a city or nation upside down for God!



                           367
                Chapter 11
   11   Is the Deliverance Ministry
                Scriptural?
    Many Christians today are being taken in by the
devil’s deception in the so-called “deliverance ministry.”
Much of what is happening today under the guise of
“deliverance” is excess and error. Any kind of
deliverance must have its foundation and practices
firmly grounded in the Word of God—not in human
experience. Much of what is going on today in
deliverance ministries cannot be found in the Bible, but
is based on human experience and excess.
    Actually, the enemy is working through some in the
so-called “deliverance ministry” in the Body of Christ to
get many good people off track and diverted from what
God desires to do in the world through His Church.

           Deliverance Belongs to You
    Despite the error that is being taught about
deliverance and demonology, deliverance is scriptural.
If you are a Christian, healing and deliverance belong to
you. But you need to realize that the word “deliverance”
doesn’t just mean deliverance from demons. Actually,
freedom from anything that would try to bind you is
part of your redemptive rights in Christ. For that
reason you should never allow anything from Satan to
bring you into bondage, because your complete
redemption from Satan’s dominion has already been
provided for you by our Lord Jesus Christ.


                           369
                 The Triumphant Church


    Jesus bought and paid for our redemption on the
Cross of Calvary. For the believer, that redemption
includes deliverance from any satanic bondage—spirit,
soul, and body. Healing and deliverance are part of our
covenant rights when we accept Jesus as our Savior
(Matt. 8:17; Luke 10:19; 1 Peter 2:24).
     Because deliverance is included in our redemption,
it is scriptural to minister deliverance to those who are
sick or oppressed by the devil. But in ministering
deliverance, we should help people first and foremost by
getting God’s Word into them so faith will rise up in
their own hearts. People can be healed and delivered
just by acting on the Word for themselves. And if God
wills, we can also minister to sick and oppressed people
by supernatural manifestations of the Spirit of God.
    But it is important to teach people what the Word of
God says first, so they can receive their healing or
deliverance for themselves and know how to hold on to
what they receive from God. Their own faith plays a
vital part in that; otherwise they won't know how to
stand against the wiles of the devil for themselves when
he tries to rob them of what they receive from the Lord.
    God may choose to use supernatural manifestations
of the Spirit to set people free, or He may not. But His
Word always works when people know what the Word
says and act on it for themselves (John 8:32). That's
why you should teach people to rely on the Word to be
set free from Satan's oppression and bondage—not on
spiritual manifestations.

          Errors and Extremes in the
            'Deliverance Ministry'
   There are several areas in particular in the so-called


                          370
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


"deliverance ministry" today that have no scriptural
basis. For example, there's the erroneous teaching that
most Christians have demons in them that need to be
cast out. But you won't find even one example in the
New Testament of the Early Church dealing with devils
in Christians. All of the people the apostles and the
Early Church cast devils out of were unbelievers. That
ought to tell us something.
   Although it's not possible for a Christian to be
possessed by a devil in his spirit, a believer can be
oppressed in mind or body by demons. Yet out of the
vast numbers of Christians I have ministered to during
more than fifty-five years in the ministry, only a small
percentage of believers had a devil in their mind or
body. But most of the so-called "deliverance ministries"
today claim that the majority if not all Christians have
devils that routinely need to be cast out. That is
nonsense!
   Even when I have dealt with demons in people, the
only way I've known a demon was present was if the
Holy Ghost revealed it to me and told me to do
something about it. Otherwise, I just ministered to
people by faith in God's Word and by the anointing of
the Holy Spirit. Both ways are scriptural.
    We can see a scriptural example of this in Acts 16
when Paul dealt with that evil spirit in the damsel. He
didn't immediately just try to cast the devil out of her,
even though that devil harassed him for many days. It
was only when the Holy Ghost revealed to Paul what to
do that he ministered to the girl and cast the devil out
of her.
    In other words, deliverance is not something we
take upon ourselves. We don't just go out seeking devils
to cast out of people or just decide to deliver someone.

                           371
                  The Triumphant Church


Deliverance should be done by the Holy Spirit's
direction. Of course we can pray for someone who is
being oppressed by the devil and stand with him in
rebuking the devil. Ultimately, however, believers are
going to have to learn how to stand against the devil for
themselves.
    But the point I am making is that you can't just look
at a person and decide that since he is acting a certain
way, he must have a demon. It isn't scriptural to try to
categorize demons from your own mental understanding
or to determine that certain demons always act in
certain ways. A demon can affect the way a person acts,
but the Holy Spirit would have to show you that a
demon is involved, because it could just be the flesh too.
You can't just figure it out in your mind; it has to be
spiritually discerned.
    In other words, true deliverance isn't just a matter
of saying that a particular problem or illness, either
mental or physical, is always caused by a demon. Be
careful in trying to label certain patterns of behavior as
demons, such as demons of jealousy, gluttony, greed,
and so forth, when it may just be works of the flesh.
    It's true that if people indulge in the works of the
flesh, they can open a door to the enemy, but the Bible
doesn't mention demons by those particular names.
However, it does teach that those characteristics are
works or evil tendencies of the flesh (Gal. 5:19-21).
    It is too easy to blame problems of the flesh on a
devil and remove the responsibility from ourselves to do
something about our fleshly tendencies. Even when an
evil spirit is involved, the kind of evil spirit influencing
or affecting a person must be discerned or revealed by
the Holy Spirit. Apart from the Holy Spirit, we wouldn't
know what kind of evil spirit is involved.

                            372
           Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


   Another excess in the so-called "deliverance
ministry" is the idea that believers need to undergo
repeated deliverances in order to be set free. There is
not one example in the New Testament where Jesus or
the Early Church ever ministered repeatedly to a
person with a devil.
    But to hear some people talk who are in the so-
called "deliverance ministry" today, they are continually
needing to minister deliverance to the same people over
and over again. They also seek deliverance for
themselves time and time again.
    If that's the case, something is wrong! That is not
scriptural. Notice in the Bible that when Jesus or one of
the apostles dealt with a person who had demons, they
spoke to the evil spirit and it left. They didn't spend
hours, days, or weeks trying to get the devil to come out
of a person.
   When people spend hour upon hour trying to get rid
of a demon in someone, it means they are trying to
minister deliverance in the flesh. If deliverance is
ministered by the Holy Spirit, under His power,
unction, and direction, results are forthcoming, and the
person doesn't need to have repeated deliverances.
   If all of today's so-called "deliverance" is right and of
God, why doesn't it work? Why do the same people keep
having the same problems over and over again and need
repeated deliverances? Or why do these people only get
"partially delivered" and have to keep coming back for
more deliverance sessions?

      Deliverance Does Not Provide 'An
               Easy Way Out'
   One reason most "deliverance" is not working is that


                            373
                 The Triumphant Church


people are trying to deal with demons when the
problem is not a demon problem at all. It is a flesh
problem or a soulish problem, and those kinds of
problems can't be "cast out." How convenient if those
problem could just be cast out! That would provide a
trouble-free solution for us all.
   The very reason "deliverance" has become so
popular is that it is an easy way out. Everyone wants an
easy way out—an instant cure and an instant answer.
Crucifying the flesh may take a little longer and be
more difficult to do, but most often that's the real
answer—not casting out demons.
    An entire chapter in this book has been devoted to
discussing what the Bible does tell the Christian to do
regarding his flesh and soul. The flesh must be
presented to God as a living sacrifice (Rom. 12:1). A
living sacrifice no longer does what it wants to do. A
living sacrifice denies and crucifies self and the flesh in
order to be able to do the will of God.
   Learning to control the flesh will never be
accomplished through "deliverance." That is an ongoing
process of sanctification, and it is the Christian's
responsibility for the rest of his life on this earth.
    I have found over the many years of my ministry
that most people's problems stem, not from demons, but
from having unrenewed minds. Many Christians do not
renew their minds to think in line with God's Word.
They believe, think, and say the wrong things, and,
therefore, they have emotional problems, mental
problems, and bondages and are constantly inviting the
attacks of the enemy because they have left the door
wide open to him.
   When I have been able to get across to people the
importance of filling themselves with the Word of God,

                           374
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


and when they have done just that, those same people
have seen problems they've struggled to conquer for
years just begin to fall away. People with traumatic
pasts have begun to see themselves as God sees them,
and they've learned how to live in the God-kind of life,
which includes victory over the devil.
    God's Word is powerful! Romans 1:16 says that the
gospel is the power of God unto salvation. That word
"salvation" in the Greek includes healing, deliverance,
protection, preservation, and wholeness or soundness.
All that power is in God and in His Word, if the
Christian will only believe it, appropriate or receive it
by faith, and act upon it. Very few Christians need
deliverance in the sense of needing demons cast out of
their bodies or souls. On the other hand, every Christian
needs to accept the responsibility of renewing his own
mind and presenting his body to God as a living
sacrifice so he can stand strong against the enemy.

          Wrong Focus Causes Error
    Another major problem with the so-called
"deliverance ministry" is that the people involved in it
become so wrapped up in "delivering" one another and
holding "deliverance meetings" that they lose sight of
Jesus' primary command to evangelize the nations
(Matt. 28:19; Mark 16:15).
    In our day, you can see entire churches and
ministries taken up with so-called deliverance. The
result is that those churches and ministries haven't won
souls as they used to since they began delving in to the
"deliverance ministry"! That is proof they are off track.
What fruit do they produce to the glory of God? Where
is the fruit Jesus talked about in John 15:8: "Herein is
my Father glorified, that ye bear MUCH FRUIT..."?

                           375
                 The Triumphant Church


   Also, much of the so-called "deliverance" of today
gets people focusing more on the devil and what he is
doing than on God and what He is doing. By this
teaching, Christians see themselves as victims of any
and every devil that desires to jump on them, instead of
appropriating the all-powerful blood of Jesus Christ
Jesus' finished work on the Cross, and the power of the
Word of God to keep them from the evil one.
    If the devil can just jump on Christians at any time
so that we all continually need deliverance, then the
blood of Jesus is powerless and our redemption is not
complete. That's not to say that Christians can't open
the door to the devil themselves. Of course they can.
But Christians who are walking in the light of the Word
don't need to fear that evil spirits are going to be
jumping on them all the time. If Christians are walking
in the light and Satan does try to attack them, they
have the authority to successfully withstand him.
    No, the majority of Christians just need to spend
quality time studying and feeding on God's Word in
order to get their thoughts and flesh lined up with God's
Word. The Word of God is anointed, and it can meet any
need in their life. They need to stop trying to get quick-
fixes through so-called "deliverance sessions."
   Once the believer really sees who he is in Christ and
the power that Christ has made available to those who
are in Him, it won't be possible for any devil to get
ahold of him, as long as he's obedient to the Word.
    It is not God's plan that good Christian people get
bogged down in practices that drain them of their
spiritual effectiveness. They could be out getting people
saved and healed, but instead they are constantly
looking for devils that aren't there in themselves and in
everyone else.

                           376
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


    Actually, many of the current "deliverance teachers"
are little more than novices in the ministry, having
been in the ministry less than ten to fifteen years. I
have been in the ministry for almost sixty years. Just
by virtue of being in the ministry a while, I've seen
certain patterns reoccurring from time to time in the
Body of Christ.
    For example, the current "deliverance" teaching is
not a new doctrine or a special revelation for the last
days, as some of these "deliverance" teachers would
have you believe. I have seen the so-called "deliverance"
ministry come and go, even when I was a young
minister back in the 1930s and 1940s. It seems to rise
up about every fifteen to twenty years, and it draws a
certain segment of Christians into it.
   When some Christians are sufficiently off track and
caught up in excess, others begin to see the error in
doctrine, and it begins to wane. Then the devil causes
some other "wind of doctrine" to surface and draws
others off into excesses in another area. The Bible says
we are not to be ignorant of the devil's wiles—his
methods to deceive.

      True Deliverance From Anything
                That Binds
    Yes, there is a true deliverance, but it is not the
deliverance that is built on human experience, as so
many are teaching today. It is deliverance based solidly
on the written, anointed Word of God, and it is
accomplished by the direction and power of the Holy
Spirit.
    It does not matter what kind of experiences
"deliverance" ministers claim to have had. If their


                           377
                 The Triumphant Church


experiences aren't rooted in God's Word, they are being
deceived. God's Word is the only standard for judging
any doctrine or practice.
    Actually, the word "deliverance" has been
overemphasized and overplayed in the Body of Christ.
By overemphasizing deliverance, some well-meaning
Christians have left the impression that "deliverance"
just means deliverance from demons.
   Deliverance does include deliverance from demons,
but it actually covers a much wider range than just
demons, because our redemption covers a far broader
range than just deliverance from demons. Thank God,
we are delivered from sin, sickness, bad habits,
bondages, and the like. Thank God, through Jesus
Christ we can be delivered from anything that tries to
bind us by the power of the Word and the Holy Spirit.
    We will have problems anytime we overemphasize a
scriptural truth. Yes, we are delivered from demons,
but that is not all we are delivered from. Actually,
whenever we preach the gospel and people are born
again, they are delivered because they are delivered
from the power of darkness and translated into the
Kingdom of light (Col. 1:13).
    Some folks think deliverance is just going through
some kind of ritual, screaming at demons and trying to
get free, but it isn't. True deliverance already belongs to
you. And you don't need to run to a "deliverance"
minister to get it either! Just appropriate the power of
God's Word for yourself.
   I believe some folks who have gone to the extreme
on the so-called deliverance ministry are thoroughly
honest and sincere people. They have many good
characteristics. But I believe they are sincerely wrong.
How can I say that? Because I have been in the same

                           378
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


boat, so to speak, that they are in now, and that's how
I've learned some of the things I know.

       My Early 'Deliverance Meetings'
   I received the baptism of the Holy Ghost in 1937. I
began pastoring a little Full Gospel church in 1938
where I met my lovely wife, Oretha.
   After we were married, we accepted the pastorate of
a larger Full Gospel church in a little country town.
More than half of my congregation were farmers in the
backlands of Texas. Cotton was "king" in those days.
    I'd been pastoring that church about two and a half
years, and as a Baptist boy preacher, I'd learned a lot
from the Pentecostals. They had every kind of service
you'd want to mention. They had deliverance meetings,
loosening services, getting-free services, double-
anointing services, and anything else you could think of.
    So I began to announce in my services that we
would start having deliverance meetings every
Saturday night. Well, the meetings started off fine. We
laid hands on people, and they supposedly got delivered.
We had every kind of manifestation and physical
demonstration you've ever seen, and some you wished
you hadn't seen! You may think these physical
manifestations and demonstrations that are going on
today in deliverance are new, but they're not. We had
similar occurrences and demonstrations back then too.
    We had a high-heel time in the Lord in these
deliverance services. But after about ninety days of
Saturday night deliverance meetings, the novelty began
to wane. So I announced that the next Saturday we
were going to start having "loosening" services.
Everyone who got delivered in the deliverance services


                           379
                 The Triumphant Church


started coming to be loosened in the loosening services!
In these loosening services, we also had every kind of a
manifestation and every kind of a physical
demonstration you could ever think to mention and
some you wouldn't want to mention.
    Then the novelty of those loosening services began
to play out and wane too. So I announced that we were
going to start having "getting-free" services. Every
Saturday night was going to be a "get-free" service.
Everyone who had come four, five, or six months before
to get delivered and then to be loosened started coming
to get free. So we went along in those "getting free"
services for a while, and then the novelty of those
services began to wear off too.
    I may be slow to catch on, but I finally said to
myself, This is not working. These people are not free. I
knew these people weren't any more set free than they
had been before any of these services began. I lived
among these people. I was their pastor. I visited them
in their homes; I knew they weren't set free.
   I would go out to their farms, and I'd help the
farmers pick a little cotton as we walked up and down
the rows talking. We would walk along the corn rows
together talking as we threw the ears of corn into the
wagon. And I could tell that these people hadn't been
set free from anything. They still had the same
problems and bondages they had before.
    I would also visit them in the evenings in their
homes, and I could see that the people were no more
delivered, no more loosened, no more set free than they
were before we began all those meetings. And yet we
had all those physical demonstrations! In fact, we had
just about every kind of physical manifestation you
could think of.

                          380
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


     I began to fast and pray and seek the Lord about it.
I said, "Lord, why didn't this work?" I'd held these kinds
of meetings because others were doing it, but I'd done it
in all sincerity and honesty. This is one way I learned
that you don't do things just because others are doing
them and that you don't build on physical
manifestations or demonstrations. The Word of God is
our guide and standard, not what other people are
doing, no matter how popular it is or how much it's the
"fad" doctrine of the day. I said, "Lord, where did I miss
it?"

    The Anointed Word Sets People Free
    The Lord answered me. He said, "You are trying to
do through prayer and laying on of hands what only My
Word will do." Then He gave me John 8:32, "Ye shall
know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."
Actually, you could say it like this and not do any
injustice to that verse: "You shall know the Word, and
the Word will make you free."
    Actually, it's knowing and acting on the Word that
sets you free. When the Lord said that to me, I saw that
I'd have to get the Word into people, so their knowledge
of the Word could begin setting them free. And that's
when I realized that people can get into trouble when
they try to get "delivered" from things that are works of
the flesh, because that opens a door to the devil.
    When the Lord told me that, I began to teach people
the Word. You see, Jesus said the words He spoke are
spirit and life (John 6:63). The Word of God is God-
breathed and God-inspired (2 Tim. 3:16). That means
the Word is anointed, and it is the anointing that
breaks the yoke of satanic bondage (Isa. 10:27). So
when a person teaches or preaches the Word under the

                           381
                The Triumphant Church


anointing or the power of the Holy Spirit, the Word will
deliver those who believe and act on the Word they
hear.
    So I began putting the teaching and preaching of the
Word first. I wasn't so interested in physical
manifestations. In the course of time as I taught people
what the Word said, every single one of those people
was delivered and set free from bondages and problems.
You see, it was the truth they were hearing and acting
on that was setting them free. After I left that church
and went out on the road, I went back to visit that
church some years later, and those same people were
still free. Bondages didn't have a hold on them because
they knew the Word.
   Whenever the Word is put first, it will work.

              Stick With the Word
    The Body of Christ needs to stay scripturally based
on the deliverance issue and not get off in a ditch on
either side of the road, just stick with what the Word
says about healing and deliverance. Yes, demons are
real, and we have to deal with them. And in some cases,
demons do have to be cast out of a believer's body or
soul. But as I've said, in all my years of ministry very
few Christians have needed deliverance in the sense of
needing a devil cast out of heir body or soul, except in
some cases of sickness and disease. Remember, the
Bible calls sickness satanic oppression (Acts 10:38).
   But on the other hand, you don't go casting demons
out of everyone you encounter who is sick either. You
don't go casting demons out of someone unless you first
have the revelation from the Holy spirit that it's a
demon causing the sickness in his body. You don't cast


                          382
           Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


demons out of people just because someone else did or
because you think you should. You need to be led and
directed by the Holy Spirit. And, of course, believers can
stand against the devil for themselves too.
    I sometimes tell about the fellow who came by our
offices years go when my son-in-law, Buddy Harrison,
worked for us. Buddy asked the man, "Well, how are
you doing today?" This Full Gospel preacher answered,
"Oh, just fine. I've already cast seventeen demons out of
myself this morning!"
    That's pushing the demon issue too far! You see,
with some of these folks, everything that's wrong is
directly caused by a devil or demon. They forget about
dealing with the flesh. They forget about the power in
the Word of God. They talk more about the devil than
they do about God, and they magnify the devil more
than they do Jesus and the finished work of the Cross.
That's how they get into the ditch on one side of the
road and give Satan access to them.
   None of these excesses are new. I've been in the
ministry many years, and I have observed that these
errors run in cycles. Back in the late '40s and '50s in the
days of The Voice of Healing, we had an outbreak of this
same excessive deliverance teaching we have today.
Then we had another outbreak of extremes and
excesses in the deliverance ministry in the '70s.
   And now I am seeing the third outbreak of it since I
began my ministry almost sixty years ago. This
teaching will surface every so often and then die out
because it isn't scriptural and it doesn't work. I'm
against extreme teaching and extreme practices in any
area.

       'Deliverance' in the Days of The

                            383
                 The Triumphant Church


                 Voice of Healing
    There was a powerful healing revival in America
from 1947 through 1958. Then the healing revival
began to wane. During that revival, some people got off
into extremes in this area of deliverance.
    In fact, because some people got into extremes on
the deliverance issue, I quit using the word
"deliverance" in my meetings, and I stopped ministering
along the lines of deliverance or teaching on that
subject. I just backed off that issue altogether because I
didn't want to be classed with those who were
doctrinally off track and in error.
    I've never gotten sick in the last fifty-six years
unless I missed it. But when I backed off the demon
issue completely, I got sick. I began to make all the
faith confessions and stand on the Word of God for my
healing, but nothing happened.
   We ought to have enough sense to know that when
we confess the Word and pray and stand on the Word
over a period of time and nothing works, something is
wrong.
   We might as well check up on ourselves and find out
what the problem is because it can't be with God; He
never changes (Mal. 3:6; Heb. 13:8).
    So when I wasn't healed by standing on the Word, I
knew I wasn't making my connection with God, so I
finally said to the Lord, "Lord, where did I miss it?" The
minute I asked Him that, the Lord began to talk to me.
He told me exactly where I missed it.
    Jesus said to me, "You missed it by backing off of
deliverance and from dealing with devils because of
people who are extreme in their teaching on


                           384
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


deliverance."
    Jesus said, "These folks who are extreme in this
demon issue by teaching that everyone has a devil in
him and that everyone has to vomit and cough up a
devil have gotten over in the ditch in fanaticism and
excess. You tried to pull away from that, and by doing
so, you got in a ditch on the other side by not dealing
with devils at all. That got you in trouble."
    When Jesus said this to me, I repented, and I was
instantly healed. Then I began preaching what the
Word says about demons and deliverance.
    You see, some of the same extremes that are being
taught today were taught in the days of The Voice of
Healing too. For example, one healing evangelist
carried a frog around in a jar and told everyone, "This
was a demon that jumped out of a woman's mouth when
I cast a devil out of her." I don't believe that anymore
than I believe you landed on Mars yesterday! You can't
put a demon—a spirit being—in a jar!
    But right on the other hand, when the gift of
discerning of spirits is in manifestation and a person
sees into the realm of the spirit, demons will sometimes
take on different forms and appearances. You need to
understand that. However, you don't go around building
a doctrine on what you see in the spirit realm. Just say
what the Word says about demons and deliverance. You
see, sometimes there is just a fine line between what's
genuine—and fanaticism and excess.

     Extreme Teachings Cause Harm to
            the Body of Christ
   The excesses and extremes in the deliverance
ministry as it's taught today always produce negative


                           385
                The Triumphant Church


results. Often this extreme teaching either offends
people and they back off from even biblical teaching, or
it makes fanatics out of them they find "devils" in
everything and everyone. In either case, the Body of
Christ is hindered and hurt.
    One extreme is that demons don't exist. For
example, I knew a pastor who had an experience
involving an evil spirit. But his experience was
discounted and condemned by many Christians because
they didn't believe that evil spirits even exist.
   The pastor had been under pressure for a long time
because his wife had been seriously ill and had finally
died. He decided to go on a trip, and he stopped at
Denver, Colorado. On Sunday he walked around
downtown.
   The pastor told me, "I saw a sign in front of a
theater that said, 'Services here tonight at 7:30.' I
thought, A Full Gospel or Pentecostal church must be
holding services in this theater. So I decided to come
back for the evening service. I went back that night,
and I got the last seat in the theater."
   The pastor said, "On the platform was a grand
piano. Almost immediately the lights went out in the
theater, and a spotlight focused on a woman wearing a
low-cut evening gown. I knew then that it wasn't a
Pentecostal service! She sat down at the piano and
began to play 'Rock of Ages.'
   "As she was singing," he continued, "another
spotlight came on, and a man wearing a tuxedo and a
high-topped silk hat began singing a verse of 'Rock of
Ages.' He had a beautiful voice. One spotlight was on
him, and another spotlight was on the woman at the
piano. The stage was well lit up.


                          386
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


    "All of a sudden," the pastor related, "the woman
just disappeared! The man just kept singing, and the
piano kept on playing, even though the woman had
disappeared. The man finished singing, walked off the
platform, and walked down the aisle to the back where
I was sitting. The spotlights followed him down the
aisle."
   The pastor said, "The man walked right up to me
and said, 'Sir, your wife died thirty days ago, and she is
here now. I have a message for you from her.'"
   The pastor said to me, "I answered the man by
saying, 'Sir, my wife did die thirty days ago, but she
was a Christian, and she's with Jesus. She's not here.'
The man in the tuxedo acted like I didn't even say
anything. In fact, he acted sort of like he was in a
trance or in some other world."
    Two more times the man in the tuxedo repeated,
"Sir, your wife died thirty days ago, and she is here. I
have a message for you from her." Both times the pastor
responded, "Sir, my wife did die thirty days ago. But
she was a Christian, and she's not here. She's in
Heaven with Jesus."
    Finally the man in the tuxedo said, "Then you refuse
to accept the message?"
    The pastor said, "I emphatically do," and the pastor
left the building.
    If that pastor had responded to this man and
received that message, the man in the tuxedo would
have told the pastor something no one but the pastor
and his wife knew. You see how people can be deceived?
It would have been supernatural all right, but it was
the work of a familiar spirit. And if the pastor had
allowed that familiar spirit to operate by receiving the


                           387
                 The Triumphant Church


man's message, that pastor could have opened the door
to satanic influences in his life.
    That man in the tuxedo wasn't getting his
information from the pastor's wife. She was in Heaven,
for the Bible says when a believer dies, he goes to be
with Jesus in Heaven (2 Cor. 5:8). This information was
from the wrong source; it was a familiar spirit in
operation. We are not to be ignorant of Satan's devices
(2 Cor. 2:11).
    God can top anything the devil can do. We're not
supposed to go to the devil to hear what he has to say.
We're not supposed to go to fortune tellers, soothsayers,
astrologers, or anyone else for that matter. We have the
Word of God and the Holy Spirit, and God will reveal to
us what He wants us to know.
    This incident happened in the days of The Voice of
Healing, and this pastor personally told me about it.
The pastor's account circulated in Full Gospel,
Pentecostal circles, and preachers of that day talked
about it. But some denied that it even happened. They
went to the extreme by denying the existence of demons
and evil spirits. We're not supposed to hide our heads in
the sand and pretend that evil spirits and demons don't
exist. But we're not supposed to get in a ditch on the
other side of the road and see demons in everything and
everyone either.
   People make a mistake by putting too much
emphasis on the devil and by spending all their time
dealing with the devil. When people think only about
the devil and what he is doing, they become devil-
conscious and actually give place to the devil. You see,
when people become devil-conscious, the devil
accommodates them and manifests himself.
   But when God is glorified and His Word is lifted up,

                          388
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


the Spirit of God manifests Himself. If people yield to
the Holy Spirit, He will demonstrate Himself and God
will be glorified.

       Physical Manifestations Are Not
          Necessary in Deliverance
    Another extreme deliverance teaching in our day is
that the devil has to manifest himself in order to be cast
out. Some people are always wanting to see
manifestations. Some believers seem to be more
interested in demonic manifestations than they are in
Holy Ghost manifestations!
    Some ministers teach as doctrine that people must
cough or vomit or have some other kind of physical
manifestation in order to get rid of a demon. People
think that’s new, but we had an outbreak of that in the
days of The Voice of Healing too. As I said, these errors
and deceptions seem to run in cycles because Satan is
the same old deceiver he’s always been.
   Don’t misunderstand me. There may be occasions
when a demon will manifest itself when it leaves
someone. For example, the Bible says a demon
manifested itself as it came out of a child who had a
dumb spirit: “And the spirit cried, and rent him sore,
and came out of him ...” (Mark 9:26).
    However, when Jesus appeared to me in the vision
in 1952, He specifically said to me, “In dealing with the
devil, don’t ever tell anyone to cough or vomit up a
demon. Expelling a demon through coughing or
vomiting may happen occasionally. If it does, fine. But
don’t you ever tell anyone to put on any kind of a
physical manifestation in order to get delivered of an
evil spirit. If you tell people that some physical


                           389
                The Triumphant Church


manifestation is to come forth, they’ll try to put on a
physical manifestation, and instead of getting rid of a
demon, they’ll get one.”
    You see, here’s where folks are missing it. Just
because some kind of physical manifestation occurs one
time when a demon leaves someone’s body or mind,
some people think, Evidently that’s the way it’s
supposed to happen every time. So they begin telling
people to start vomiting or coughing to get rid of evil
spirits. I have seen ministers do this. For instance, I
was in a certain meeting, and one of the ministers
announced to the entire audience, “Everyone bring a
paper sack to the next meeting.” He wanted people to
bring a paper bag so they could vomit up evil spirits!
    But you can’t build a doctrine on a manifestation or
on an experience and expect it to happen that same way
every time. In studying the New Testament, you won’t
find even one example of anyone vomiting or coughing
up evil spirits. And you won’t be able to find any
scriptural principles or doctrine to support such a
practice.
    Believers who go around seeing devils in other
believers are creating havoc in the local church body.
I’ve actually dealt with people who became so devil-
conscious because of extreme teaching in this area that
they actually got an evil spirit when they didn’t have
one before. When people are taught that believers have
devils which routinely need to be cast out and there
always has to be a physical manifestation when the
devil departs, it actually opens a door to the devil.
   You see, Satan is the god of this world (2 Cor. 4:4),
so he can manifest himself in the physical realm. He
can work in the realm of the flesh through what people
experience with their five physical senses. In other

                          390
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


words, Satan's realm is based on what people can see,
feel, and experience in the natural realm.
   But faith isn't based on what you can see. Faith is
based on what the Word says. The Bible says that Jesus
cast out evil spirits with His Word (Matt. 3:16).
    Therefore, if you tell people they are going to have
some kind of physical manifestation in order to get rid
of an evil spirit, you are really teaching them how to
yield to the devil, because the devil operates in the
physical realm.
    Instead of trying to create fleshly demonstrations to
get rid of evil spirits, teach people what the Word says
so they can learn how to yield to the Holy Ghost. When
people yield to the Holy Ghost, He will manifest
Himself. Let's just get back in the middle of the road on
the demon issue, and stick with the Word of God!

   Extreme Practices: Watch Where You
                   Go
    Let me share something that happened to someone
to show you how dangerous it is to go to meetings where
extreme deliverance teachings are taught. My wife and
I were holding a meeting in a certain city, and a woman
asked if she could talk to us.
   She told us her story. She said, "I went to a certain
place where some ministers were holding a 'deliverance
meeting' and were casting devils out of people. I never
had any problem before, but these ministers told me,
'You've got a devil. Let us cast it out of you.'
    "Then they told me to begin to cough and vomit up
that devil; they said it would come out of me that way. I
started trying to cough and vomit. All of a sudden white
froth started coming out of my mouth. They told me it

                           391
                 The Triumphant Church


was a manifestation of an evil spirit. They said, 'That
devil is out of you now.'"
    You see, these ministers taught this woman to do
something that is unscriptural and something Jesus
told me not to do. They told her to try to put on some
kind of a physical manifestation in the flesh, and that
opened the door for a demon to come in and
accommodate her.
    She told my wife and me, "It's been months since I
went to that deliverance meeting, but this white foam
never stops flowing out of my mouth. I stayed there
several days and tried to get them to help me. But they
just told me, 'We can't do anything about it.' Brother
Hagin, can you help me?"
   I had noticed this woman holding a tissue to her
mouth during the entire service. She must have gone
through a whole box of tissues just during that one
service alone. She told us that she had to hold tissues to
her mouth wherever she went because that white foam
continually came out of her mouth.
    When she asked if I could help her, I said, "Sure I
can. That is a manifestation of a devil. But you didn't
have a devil to begin with. You got one because you
went to the wrong place and got on Satan's territory,
and you let folks who weren't scriptural in their
teaching or practices minister to you. They told you to
do something that wasn't scriptural, and they actually
told you how to yield to the devil. By doing that, you
opened the door to the devil, and he accommodated
you."
    Never submit to anyone's teaching, I don't care who
they are or who they claim to be, unless they can prove
that what they are teaching, preaching, and practicing
is in the Bible. Nowhere in the Gospels did Jesus ever

                           392
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


tell anyone to try to have a physical manifestation in
order to get rid of an evil spirit. And you won't see that
practiced anywhere in the New Testament either!
    So I said to this woman, "Yes, certainly I can help
you. But I'm not going to do a thing about it unless you
will do something."
   "What?" she asked.
    "Don't ever go to a 'deliverance school' or a
'deliverance meeting' again. Stay away from places
where extreme doctrine is taught. Avoid extreme
doctrines and extreme practices like you would poison,
because you'll get devils instead of being delivered from
them."
    She said, "I'll never go to one of those meetings
again." Then she asked me, "When you rebuke this evil
spirit, will there be any manifestation?"
   I said, "No, none at all, except that the white froth
running out of your mouth will stop instantly the
minute I rebuke the evil spirit that's causing it."
   She asked, "Am I supposed to do anything?"
   I said, "No, you don't need to do a thing. Just sit
there."
    My wife and I were sitting on one side of the room,
and the woman was sitting in front of us. We didn't
even get up. All I did was point my finger toward the
woman and calmly speak to that demon, saying, "You
foul spirit, in the Name of Jesus, come out of her." And
as quickly as you'd snap your finger, that froth stopped.
It had been running out of her mouth continually for
three or four months, but it stopped instantly the
moment I commanded it to in the Name of Jesus. She
never had any more trouble with that demon again.


                           393
                 The Triumphant Church


   This woman wasn't demon possessed, because she
was a Christian. But she had yielded to an evil spirit,
and that demon accommodated her and was
manifesting itself through her flesh. Because she
accepted this extreme doctrine that every believer has
demons, she'd become demon-conscious and had opened
a door for the devil to manifest himself through her
body.
   When this woman was delivered, she was so
grateful. She came back to our services later, and she
was still completely delivered.
   Here's something else I want you to see. To get that
woman delivered, I didn't have to yell at the devil for
hours. You won't find any scripture in the Bible where
Jesus yelled at the devil for hours, or where it took Him
days to cast the devil out of anyone. He cast out demons
with His Word. His Word!
    You need to be careful where you go to be ministered
to. Don't get involved in meetings where people want to
see the devil manifesting himself through physical
demonstrations. And don't go to places where ministers
teach that every Christian has a devil that needs to be
cast out.
   I don't care who the minister is, if he tells you that
you have to carry on and demonstrate in the flesh in
order to get delivered, don't listen to him! If you start
putting on a physical demonstration by coughing and
vomiting to try to get delivered, you might get a devil!

    Don't Build Doctrine on Experiences
   Actually, in all my years of ministry, only three
times has there ever been a physical manifestation like
vomiting or coughing when a demon left a person. One


                          394
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


time I was praying for people in a prayer line, and I
knew by the word of knowledge that a certain woman
had a demon in her body.
   In this woman's case, I knew in my spirit that there
would be a physical manifestation as the evil spirit left
her, so I asked my wife to take her to the restroom. And
that woman did expel the evil spirit by vomiting. But,
you see, in that instance, the Holy Spirit directed me to
deal with the evil spirit in that way, and the demon was
expelled privately where it wouldn't create confusion
among the congregation.
    A minister needs to use wisdom in dealing publicly
with evil spirits in someone. Even if a believer is
afflicted in body or soul by an evil spirit, you don't
necessarily cast it out in public where there are baby
Christians and people who wouldn't understand, or
where it could cause fear or panic to come upon a
congregation.
   Two other times a similar situation occurred in my
ministry when I knew by the Holy Spirit that there
would be a physical manifestation and the person would
vomit up an evil spirit. But that has been the exception,
not the rule.
    You see, we can't make ironclad rules about these
things. Why would we need the Holy Spirit if we could
go by a set of rules or formulas? These things have to he
spiritually discerned. You have to rely on the Holy
Spirit. You can't just use human reasoning.

      Receiving 'Words' From the Lord
    There is another extreme practice pertaining to
deliverance in the Body of Christ today. Some believers
are always giving out personal "words" of prophecy,


                           395
                 The Triumphant Church


telling others what demons they have.
    A pastor of a church told me an incident that
illustrates how dangerous these "personal words" of
prophecy can be. The pastor said that a guest speaker
came to his church and would call certain people out of
the audience to minister to them.
    The pastor told me, "We took these people into a
side room to minister to them. The guest speaker laid
hands on one particular woman, and said, 'The Lord
shows me that you have a spirit of homosexuality. He
shows me that you have had encounters with other
women before you were married and even since you
were married.' Then that minister wanted to cast the
evil spirit out of her!"
    This woman had been happily married for many
years and had two children. She'd never been involved
in homosexuality in her life!
   But after this guest minister said this to her, she
began to be tormented with the thoughts, Maybe way
down deep inside me there is something evil lurking in
me that I don't know about. After all, this is a man of
God and he said 'Thus saith the Lord.'
     The pastor told me, "This poor woman virtually lost
her mind over what this minister said to her because it
opened a door for the devil to torment her. She told me,
'I've never in my life had any sexual relations with
anyone except my husband. And I have never had any
desire for a relationship with anyone else, much less a
homosexual relationship!'"
   I don't care who the minister claims to be, if what he
says doesn't line up with the Word of God and if it
doesn't bear witness with your own spirit, forget it.
   You see, the devil tries to torment people, and he

                          396
          Is the Deliverance Ministry Scriptural?


can get away with it when believers are ignorant of
their rights and privileges in Christ, and when they
aren't familiar with the whole counsel of God's Word.
This woman was devastated by this so-called "word
from the Lord," thinking she had to accept it as the
truth.
    People who aren't well grounded in the Word of God
can misuse and abuse spiritual gifts and create havoc in
the Body of Christ. Some believers who try to operate in
spiritual gifts act like children playing with toys.
   Misguided people can misuse and abuse the
operation of the gifts of the Spirit and just talk out of
their own minds. Or even worse, they can yield to
familiar spirits. This hurts innocent people and allows
the devil to take advantage of them.
    It's through erroneous teachings and practices like
this that many people have become afraid of evil spirits
and the devil. If believers would receive solid scriptural
teaching in this area, that wouldn't happen.
    Believers aren't to fear Satan, because Jesus already
defeated him on the Cross of Calvary. The Body of
Christ isn't a defeated Church—always running away
from Satan in fear. We are seated with Christ in
heavenly places, and we are to exercise our position of
authority in Jesus' Name. We are the Church
triumphant!




                           397
               Chapter 12
  12   Scriptural Ways to Minister
              Deliverance
    What does the Bible say about ministering
deliverance to people? We know deliverance is
scriptural because everywhere Jesus went in His
earthly ministry, He ministered deliverance to the sick
and the oppressed. Jesus is our Example. We are to
follow in His footsteps in what He taught and practiced
(1 Peter 2:21; 1 John 2:6). So how did Jesus minister
deliverance to people?

          Jesus’ Deliverance Ministry
   Keep in mind that even in Jesus’ deliverance
ministry, He didn’t minister here on this earth as the
Son of God. The Bible says He stripped Himself of His
mighty power and glory when He came into this world
and became as a human being (Phil. 2:7).
    It’s true that Jesus had the Spirit of God without
measure (John 3:34), and believers only have the Spirit
in a measure (Rom. 12:3). But in His earth walk, Jesus
ministered as any person would who was anointed by
the Holy Spirit. Jesus Himself said He had to be
anointed to minister deliverance to the captives (Luke
4:18,19). In other words, He didn’t minister deliverance
just because He was the Son of God. He was anointed
by the Holy Spirit to minister, just as we have to be.
   The Word always came first with Jesus even in
ministering deliverance. Jesus said He was anointed by

                          399
                The Triumphant Church


the Holy Ghost to preach deliverance to the captives
and to heal the sick and oppressed. Jesus preached
deliverance. That means He preached the gospel. Jesus
always put the Word first, and He was anointed by the
Holy Spirit.
    Just as Jesus did, we’ll also have to put the Word
first and rely on the anointing of the Holy Spirit to
preach and minister healing and deliverance.
   ACTS 10:38
   38 ... God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the
   Holy Ghost and with power: who went about
   doing good, and HEALING all that were
   OPPRESSED OF THE DEVIL....

    The Bible calls sickness satanic oppression.
Therefore, we know that all sickness and disease is
directly or indirectly a result of satanic oppression.
   And according to the Bible, there sometimes seems
to be a relationship between healing the sick and
casting out devils. In other words, the Bible gives us
some instances where evil spirits had to be dealt with
before people's diseased bodies could be healed.
    In the following scriptures, we can readily see a
relationship between healing the sick and casting out
devils.
   LUKE 4:40,41
   40 Now when the sun was setting, all they that
   had any SICK WITH DIVERS DISEASES
   brought them unto him [Jesus]; and he laid his
   hands on every one of them, and HEALED them.
   41 And DEVILS also came out of many, crying
   out, and saying, Thou art Christ the Son of God.
   And he REBUKING THEM suffered them not to
   speak: for they knew that he was Christ.



                         400
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance

   LUKE 6:17,18
   17 And he came down with them, and stood in
   the plain, and the company of his disciples, and
   a great multitude of people out of all Judaea
   and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre
   and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be
   HEALED of their DISEASES;
   18 And they that were VEXED WITH UNCLEAN
   SPIRITS: and THEY WERE HEALED.

   LUKE 7:21
   21 And in that same hour he CURED MANY OF
   THEIR INFIRMITIES and PLAGUES, and of
   EVIL SPIRITS; and unto many that were blind
   he gave sight.

   In all these scriptures, casting out evil spirits and
healing the sick seem to be linked together.
    But in studying Jesus' deliverance ministry, you'll
also see that the Bible often differentiates between
healing the sick and casting out devils.
    In other words, Jesus didn't always cast out devils
to get the sick healed because not every sick person had
demons in him causing the sickness.
    What this means to us is that there are no ironclad
rules; you'll have to follow the Holy Spirit in
ministering to the sick and oppressed, just as Jesus did.
    Study the Gospels for yourself and see how Jesus
dealt with evil spirits. You'll find that at times Jesus
dealt with evil spirits in order to heal sickness and
disease.
    At other times Jesus merely healed the person using
a variety of methods (Matt. 8:16; 9:22,29). Jesus also
used various methods in dealing with demons and evil
spirits. He didn't always cast them out. He dealt with


                           401
                 The Triumphant Church


them by other methods too.
   Let's look at an example in Jesus' ministry where
we see a connection between evil spirits and sickness.
One method Jesus used to minister deliverance was by
the anointing of the Holy Spirit through the laying on of
hands.
   LUKE 13:11-13,16
   11 And, behold, there was a woman which had a
   SPIRIT OF INFIRMITY eighteen years, and was
   bowed together, and could in no wise lift up
   herself.
   12 And when Jesus saw her, he called her to
   him, and said unto her, WOMAN, THOU ART
   LOOSED FROM THINE INFIRMITY.
   13 And he LAID HIS HANDS ON HER: and
   immediately she was made straight, and
   glorified God....
   16 And ought not this woman, being a daughter
   of Abraham, WHOM SATAN HATH BOUND, lo,
   these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond
   on the sabbath day?

    The Bible says this woman's affliction was caused by
an evil spirit—"a spirit of infirmity" (v. 11). Jesus said
it was Satan who had bound her (v. 16).
   In this case, an evil spirit of infirmity was present in
the woman's body causing and enforcing this physical
condition.
    But notice how Jesus dealt with the evil spirit in
this case. He didn't cast it out. He laid hands on the
woman and gave the command of faith, "... Woman,
thou art loosed from thine infirmity" (v. 12). And the
woman was delivered.
   You see, when the anointing or power of the Holy
Spirit came upon this woman, she was instantly

                           402
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


"loosed" or set free from an evil spirit of infirmity.
    So demons can be directly involved in physical
ailments. But Jesus didn't cast out that spirit of
infirmity; He laid hands on her, and the anointing
broke the yoke of satanic bondage.
   In other situations, Jesus did cast evil spirits out of
some people. How did He do it? With His Word!
   MATTHEW 8:16
   16 When the even was come, they brought unto
   him [Jesus] many that were POSSESSED with
   devils: and he CAST OUT THE SPIRITS with
   HIS WORD, and HEALED all that were SICK.

    In some cases of sickness, the sickness or disease is
a result of natural causes, but indirectly it's still satanic
oppression. If sickness is the result of natural causes,
the person needs to be healed—he doesn't need evil
spirits cast out of him.
   On the other hand, sometimes an evil spirit is
present enforcing a disease or infirmity. You'll only
know by the Holy Spirit.
    If the Holy Spirit doesn't reveal the presence of an
evil spirit, you can help people get healed by teaching
them faith in God's Word. But I am thoroughly
convinced that a number of different ailments can be
dealt with only by dealing with evil spirits.
   And in those cases, unless the evil spirit is dealt
with by the power and direction of the Holy Spirit, you
can anoint people with oil and lay hands on them until
you've worn every hair off their heads, but you still
won't get results.
    Those kinds of sicknesses don't respond to the usual
biblical methods of ministering healing. In those cases,
the evil spirit has to be dealt with by the unction and

                            403
                 The Triumphant Church


leading of the Holy Spirit.
    That's the reason some cases of sicknesses don't
respond to medical treatment. Sicknesses that are
caused by the actual presence of an evil spirit can't be
treated with natural remedies.
    But if an evil spirit is directly causing the sickness
and disease, and the believer is standing on the Word in
faith, he can depend on God to deliver him. However,
the evil spirit will have to be dealt with by the power of
the Holy Spirit and the Word of God.
   In Mark 9:17-29, we see another example of Jesus
dealing with an evil spirit, this time in the lunatic boy.
How did Jesus deal with that evil spirit? He rebuked it
and cast it out of the boy.
    But Jesus did that by the same anointing of the
Holy Spirit that was upon Him when He touched and
loosed the woman bound by the spirit of infirmity.
   Sickness and disease is not always the result of the
presence of a demon. For instance, in Mark 7:32-37
Jesus dealt with a man who was deaf and had a speech
impediment.
    Evidently, an evil spirit wasn't involved in this
infirmity because Jesus just put his finger in the man's
ears and said, "Be opened," and the man spoke plainly.
Jesus didn't deal with an evil spirit at all. Evidently the
man's deafness resulted from natural causes, so he just
needed to be healed.
    But in another instance, Jesus ministered to a man
who was "dumb" or couldn't speak. This time, before
Jesus could get the man healed, He had to cast out an
evil spirit.
   MATTHEW 9:32,33


                              404
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance

   32... they brought to him a dumb man
   POSSESSED WITH A DEVIL.
   33 And WHEN THE DEVIL WAS CAST OUT, THE
   DUMB SPAKE: and the multitudes marvelled,
   saying, It was never so seen in Israel.

    But the point I'm trying to make is that Jesus didn't
set a pattern as he dealt with devils and evil spirits.
Even in his deliverance ministry, Jesus followed the
leading of the Holy Spirit and ministered by the power
and direction of the Holy Spirit.

        Deliverance by the Anointing
    It was the Word that Jesus taught and the
anointing that brought deliverance to those who were
afflicted by demons. Today we will also have to minister
deliverance by the Word and the anointing—the power
of the Holy Spirit.
   LUKE 6:17-19
   17 And he came down with them, and stood in
   the plain, and the company of his disciples, and
   a great multitude of people out of all Judaea
   and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre
   and Sidon, which came to HEAR him, and to be
   HEALED of their diseases:
   18 And they that were VEXED WITH UNCLEAN
   SPIRITS: and THEY WERE HEALED.
   19 And the whole multitude SOUGHT TO
   TOUCH HIM for there WENT VIRTUE [the
   Greek word is "dynamin" or power] OUT OF
   HIM, and healed them all.

   Notice in verse 17 that the people came to hear
Jesus and to be healed. It was the anointing on the
Word that set people free. Faith comes by hearing the
Word of God, and it is by faith that we receive the


                           405
                The Triumphant Church


promises of God, including deliverance from any kind of
bondage.
    Faith in the Word of God is the key that opens
Heaven and activates the power of God to work in a
person's life no matter what kind of demonic activity or
influence is involved. When Jesus taught the people the
Word of God—preached deliverance to the captives—
and the people believed the Word, they were healed and
delivered.
   The multitude who sought to touch Jesus were
people who were diseased and oppressed or "vexed" by
unclean spirits. The word “healed” in verse 18 means
the people were made whole or delivered.
    In this passage, not one evil spirit was cast out of
anyone. As far as we know, not one evil spirit was even
discerned, yet when those who were vexed with unclean
spirits heard what Jesus taught, they were delivered.
What delivered them? It was the Word that Jesus
taught and the power of the Holy Spirit.
    The same power that heals a person will run the
devil out no natter what kind of demonic influence is
involved—if the person will act on God's anointed Word
in faith.
    Studying the Gospels, we can see that Jesus
ministered healing and deliverance by a variety of
methods. But no matter how Jesus ministered
deliverance, the delivering power of God was always
present to heal people and set them free when activated
by the person's faith. The same is true today. The
delivering power of God is always available to set
people free.
    Also, Jesus didn't have prolonged and repeated
'deliverance' sessions to get people free from satanic


                          406
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


bondages. Regardless of the method He used, the
person's healing or deliverance was always forthcoming.
    Ministering deliverance is scriptural, but we can't go
beyond the Word and the leading of the Holy Spirit.
That is how people have gotten into error and excesses
in the deliverance ministry and have caused harm to
the Body of Christ. Let's just stick with the Word and
follow Jesus' example of ministering deliverance to the
sick and oppressed.
   In my own ministry, many times I've seen that
people who had he same type of sickness or disease
were healed or delivered by various methods, as the
Holy Spirit directed.

      Epilepsy: Healing vs. Deliverance
    Because Satan is the god of this world (2 Cor. 4:4),
there are cruel tormenting spirits of fear, unclean
spirits, dumb, blind, and deaf spirits, spirits of
infirmity, and other evil spirits here on the earth.
    You'll notice that every one of those spirits is
mentioned in the Bible. On our own, we can't tell
whether the cause of a person's physical infirmity is an
evil spirit or a natural cause. However, the Holy Spirit
knows all things. He will lead us into all truth and
show us how to minister to a person.
   For example, I've laid hands on some people who
had epilepsy, and they were healed because the epilepsy
was caused from a physical disorder. No demon was
involved. But right on the other hand, I've also laid
hands on people with epilepsy, and the Holy Spirit
showed me that a demon was involved that was causing
the epilepsy.
   I was preaching in a meeting once and many people

                           407
                 The Triumphant Church


came forward for healing, so I just laid hands on the
people. The next year we were in the same area, and a
woman came forward to give us a testimony about her
son who had been healed in that first meeting. He was
twelve years old, and he'd had epilepsy all his life.
   She related, "When you prayed for my son, the
healing power of God came upon him and he fell under
the power of God. He's never had another seizure."
   You see, in that case of epilepsy, the boy only needed
healing; he didn't need an evil spirit cast out of his
body. If an evil spirit had been present, the Lord would
have shown me by the Holy Spirit.
    But in another case of epilepsy, the Holy Spirit
showed me that an evil spirit was present causing the
infirmity. A young man came forward for healing in one
of my meetings who had suffered from epileptic seizures
since high school. When I laid hands on him, I knew by
the word of knowledge that an evil spirit was involved
in his epileptic seizures and that I would have to cast it
out of his body before he could be set free. So I did. A
few days later we closed the meeting and left that area.
    A year later I held a meeting in the same town, and
I saw that same young man. When I looked at him, the
Spirit of God said to me, "When you were here last year,
you cast an evil spirit out of him, and for twelve
months, he didn't have one single epileptic seizure. But
in the last two weeks, he's had three epileptic seizures."
    The Holy Spirit said, "When he had these seizures
before, he never had them in the nighttime when he
was sleeping. But in these last two weeks, he's been
awakened in the nighttime with seizures. And the
reason he had those seizures is that he went to sleep
afraid. So before you begin preaching, call him up here
and cast that evil spirit out of him again."

                           408
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


    You see, in that instance, the Lord not only told me
that an evil spirit was involved causing the man's
seizures, but He also told me how the man had let the
evil spirit back in. Sometimes you need to know if
there's a cause—if the person has opened a door to
Satan that let the sickness and disease in—before you
can minister effectively to people.
    So before I began preaching, I called the young man
forward. I said to him, "When I was here last year, I
ministered to you, and you were delivered from epileptic
seizures. For twelve months you did not have one single
epileptic seizure."
   He said, "That's right, but..."
    I said, "Wait a minute. Don't say anything. Let me
tell you what happened so you'll know God is moving
supernaturally on your behalf. If I miss it, just speak up
and say, 'You missed it.' After all, I'm human. I can
miss it. Anyone can. In the last two weeks, you've lad
three seizures that have awakened you out of sleep.
When you had epileptic seizures before, you were never
awakened with a seizure in the middle of the night."
    His eyes got big and he said, "Why, that's exactly
right. You must be a mind reader or a fortune teller!"
    Isn't it strange that Christians would think that
mind readers or fortune tellers could reveal something
like that, but poor ole God has lost all His revelation
ability!
   I asked him, "Do you know why you began to be
awakened with seizures in the night?"
   He said, "No, do you?"
    I said, "I sure do. You went to sleep afraid, and the
fear opened a door to the devil."


                            409
                  The Triumphant Church


   He said, "Now I know you're a mind reader. That's
exactly what happened."
   I said, "I'm not reading your mind. And I didn't get
that out of my mind either. In fact, my mind doesn't
have a thing in the world to do with it."
    Moving in the realm of the Spirit is not a mental
experience. If ye could follow the Spirit of God and the
Word of God without human reasoning getting in the
way, we'd be better off! God operates through the
recreated spirit of man; he doesn't operate through
man's mind because it hasn't been born again.
   This young man said, "I usually dealt with that fear
before I went to sleep. But those particular nights when
I had the epileptic seizures, I didn't get rid of fear
before I went to sleep."
    Fear can open the door to the enemy. For example, if
you went to bed tonight and left the door in your home
open, there's no telling who or what would come in. A
burglar could come in and rob or kill you. It's just better
to keep your door shut and your house secured! It's the
same way in the spiritual realm. You'd better keep the
door shut to Satan.
     Fear is a spirit. But God didn't give us the spirit of
fear (2 Tim. 1:7), so that means you have authority over
it. Since it doesn't come from God, you have no business
with it. So if fear is troubling you, get rid of it in Jesus'
Name.
    I told this young man, "I'm going to cast the evil
spirit out of you again, and I'm going to show you how
to keep the door shut on the devil." In the Name of
Jesus, I cast out the evil spirit that was causing the
epilepsy. Then I spent forty-five minutes teaching him
how to resist Satan and maintain his healing and keep


                            410
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


the door shut on the devil. Many years have passed
since that man was healed, and he's never had another
seizure.

      The Anointing Breaks the Yoke of
                 Bondage
    We saw that in Jesus' healing ministry, many
people were delivered from evil spirits just by the
anointing of the Holy Spirit. In other words, evil spirits
don't always have to be cast out; the anointing of the
Holy Spirit can drive them out too. I've seen that in my
own ministry too. I could tell you testimony after
testimony of people who were delivered from demonic
oppression just from the anointing—the power of God
coming upon them.
    For example, several months after we had held a
meeting in Detroit, a woman wrote me telling her
testimony. In the letter she said, "Brother Hagin, I had
a stomach disorder, so I came to your crusade to receive
my healing. You laid hands on me and prayed for me.
The anointing came on me, and I fell on the floor under
the power of God. After all these months, I am still
healed."
   She continued, "I've been saved about eight years.
Before I got saved, I was in the occult. But after I was
saved and filled with the Holy Spirit, I still had
problems with demons manifesting in my presence. In
the nighttime I still heard voices and rappings on the
wall and other demonic manifestations.
   "But since the power of God came on me so strongly
when you laid hands on me," she wrote, "I've never
heard another voice, and here's never been another
demonic manifestation in my home."


                           411
                 The Triumphant Church


         Cancer: Deliverance by a
       Manifestation of the Holy Spirit
    I want to show you that God has a variety of
methods of delivering His people. I'm going to relate
several instances of dealing with people who had cancer
and the various ways the Holy Spirit led me to deal
with each of them. I want you to see that you will have
to be led by the Holy Spirit—you cannot formulate
ironclad rules about ministering to people.
   In 1952, I held a revival in Texas. One of the
ministers told me about his niece who was dying of
cancer of the lungs. She was twenty-three years old and
had two small children. During the first week of my
meetings, she was brought to a service, and I prayed for
her. The second week, I laid hands on her two different
times and prayed for her.
    During the third week, the young woman was
brought to the service again. I no more expected what
happened than anything in the world. When I laid my
hand on her this time, suddenly a white cloud of the
Holy Spirit came down and enveloped me. The altar
disappeared and it seemed like the young woman and I
were the only ones standing there in that cloud of glory.
No one else could see what I saw, nor hear what I
heard, but they could all hear me talking.
    Enveloped in that white cloud, I saw into the realm
of the spirit, and I saw a little creature—a demon—
hanging on the outside of this woman's body. It looked
like a little monkey hanging on to a tree limb. This
woman was saved, so she wasn't demon possessed, but
her body was being oppressed from the outside by a
demon, that little monkey-like creature was hanging on
to her body over her left lung; that's where the cancer


                          412
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


had started.
   I just spoke to the demon and said, "In Jesus' Name,
you're going to have to leave her."
   That little creature answered me, but no one else
heard it because I was seeing and hearing in the spirit
realm. That's the gift discerning of spirits in operation.
   That little monkey-like demon said to me, "I know I
have to go if you tell me to, but I don't want to."
   I said, "I command you to leave her in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ." That little demon fell off of her
body and landed on the floor. He lay there on the floor
and whimpered and whined and shook, just like a little
pup that had been whipped.
   I said, "Not only leave her body, but you leave these
premises in the Name of Jesus." When I said that, the
demon got up and ran down the aisle and out the door.
   This woman had been saved since she was eight
years old, but she had never been filled with the Holy
Spirit. She immediately lifted both hands and began
speaking in tongues. That same week, she went back to
the cancer clinic and the doctors told her, "Your lungs
are completely clear. There's not a thing in the world
wrong with them. What happened?"
    She told them exactly what had happened. She told
them what I had seen and done. The doctors said, "Well,
whoever the fellow is, our hat is off to him! Evidently
he's got the answer. We don't. But we'll give you a
signed affidavit that you had cancer of both lungs and
that now you're free of it."
   God has the answer, not me. If a manifestation of
the Holy Spirit doesn't come, I always just teach,
preach, and minister the Word of God to people,
because I can't operate gifts of the Holy Spirit at will (1

                           413
                  The Triumphant Church


Cor. 12:11).
     What I want to get you to see is this. Until I was in
the Spirit, I didn't know an evil spirit was afflicting this
woman's body. You can't guess at these things.
Certainly, I ministered to people according to faith in
God's Word, and people were getting saved, healed, and
filled with the Holy Spirit. But when I was in the Spirit,
God revealed that it was an evil spirit causing this
woman's lung cancer, and God supernaturally equipped
me to deal with the demon that was enforcing the
disease in her body.
    Also, if it were just me operating a gift of the Spirit,
I would have dealt with that spirit the very first night
the woman came to the meeting. If the Holy Spirit
doesn't operate through me, I'm helpless. God has His
own ways of doing things, and it's best just to let Him
do what He wants to do. I don't have supernatural
manifestations in every meeting because no one can
produce a manifestation of the Spirit himself. A person
can't work something up and try to make something
happen. If he tries to, he will open himself up to evil
spirits and get off into error.
    And just because I had that particular manifestation
in one meeting, if I'd tried to produce the same
manifestation at the next meeting, I would have gotten
off track and opened the door to the devil.
   You and I don't operate spiritual gifts. If you try to
operate hem, the devil will accommodate you, and you'll
open the door for satanic deception. Spiritual gifts
operate as the Holy Spirit wills.
    You see, you don't necessarily deal with every
cancer case the same way every time or any other kind
of disease the same way in very case. But you always
tell people what the Word says. Just because you had

                            414
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


one experience that resulted in a person's deliverance,
you don't build a doctrine on that and try to minister to
every person the same way.
    You follow the leading of the Holy Spirit, and if a
gift of the Holy Spirit is manifested to minister to the
person, that's fine. Then you can follow the leading of
the Holy Spirit and minister to he person by the power
and unction of the Spirit of God.
    If the Holy Spirit doesn't choose to manifest Himself
in spiritual gifts, just keep teaching people how to stand
against sickness and disease with the Word of God. The
Word always works.

               Bedfast With Cancer
   I remember another instance of ministering to a
woman with cancer. My wife and I went with another
pastor to pray for a pastor's wife who was bedfast with
terminal cancer. The cancer had started in her left
breast and had spread to her lymph glands. By the time
she got to the doctor, he told her, "It's too late. We can't
do anything for you." By the time we went to pray for
her, she was bedfast. The doctor said, "She ought to be
dead already. We can't understand how she's lived this
long."
   As we gathered to pray for this woman, we waited
on God in prayer and sought His direction. We were
there in that parsonage praying almost continually for
her for two days and two nights. We slept four hours
each night. The rest of the time we prayed and sought
God.

      The Sending End or the Receiving
                   End?


                            415
                 The Triumphant Church


    Finally, at four o'clock in the morning on the third
night, I said to the pastor, "In fifteen years of ministry,
I've never prayed to God this long about anything
without getting the answer. We must be missing it
somewhere. We don't have to pray this long for
something that has already been promised to us in the
Word. I think this is where we're missing it. We're
working on the sending end, God, heal this woman!'
    "But, actually," I said, "we've gotten nowhere
because as far as God is concerned, He has already
healed her. He laid her sickness on Jesus at the Cross.
When we pray for her in the morning, let's work on the
receiving end instead of the sending end."
    Here's where a lot of folks miss it. When they don't
make their connection in prayer, they don't stop to
listen to the Spirit of God and find out why they
haven't. They just go on without checking with God.
Many times if we aren't making our connection in
prayer, we need to inquire of the Lord and find out why.
Then we need to let the Holy Spirit correct us if we need
correction. And if we've taken the wrong turn, so to
speak, we need to back up and take the right turn.
   So we gathered in that room the next morning at
eight o'clock—the pastor and his wife, my wife and me,
the sick woman's husband who was also a pastor, and
the woman with cancer. I told them what the Lord had
shown me.
    We all knelt down by the bed to pray again. We
sought God to see what the Holy Spirit would say about
this woman's situation. We all prayed in the Spirit in
other tongues, seeking God's direction.
   Suddenly something on the inside of me said, "Go
stand at the foot of the bed." I stopped praying in
tongues and got back in the mental realm. I thought,

                           416
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


What good would it do to go stand at the foot of the bed?
So I just dismissed the thought. This was all new to me.
I didn't know the Voice of the Holy Spirit then like I do
now.
    I went back to praying again, and I heard these
words again, "Go stand at the foot of the bed!" I got
back into mental reasoning. I thought, Standing at the
foot of the bed won't get this woman healed.
    But did you ever stop to think about it? Jesus spit in
the dirt and made mud and put that mud in a fellow's
blind eyes and said, "Go wash it off in the Pool of
Siloam" (John 9:7).
    Well, in the natural, what good would mud do to
heal that man? But, you see, it's faith and obedience
that counts with God. It's just best to follow the leading
of the Holy Spirit and do what He tells you to do. That
always brings results! The Holy Spirit will always lead
you in line with God's Word, and what He tells you to do
will always work.
    The Holy Spirit said that same thing to me the third
time. This time I went and stood at the foot of the bed
and continued praying in tongues. Suddenly my wife
stood up, and still praying in other tongues, came and
stood at the foot of the bed with me. She never did open
her eyes. She told me later that she didn't know I was
there.
   Suddenly, as my wife was praying in tongues, the
tongues changed. She began speaking out what we call
a message in tongues. But I heard what she said as
though she spoke to me in English.
   The Holy Spirit said through her, "Go stand at the
head of the bed and say, 'Come out, you spirits of doubt
and fear in the Name of Jesus.'" So I just moved up to


                           417
                 The Triumphant Church


the head of the bed and said, Come out, you spirits of
doubt and fear in the Name of Jesus." I had my eyes
open, watching. The moment I said that, it looked me
like a great big black bat, twice as big as a man's hand,
just rise up from that dying woman's left breast and
flew out the window. The pastor who was standing on
that side of the bed told me later, "Something went
right by me and flew out the window. I didn't see
anything, but it flew by me like a bird in flight."
    The woman instantly rose up completely healed and
praised God and danced all over the house. That
afternoon she ate watermelon with us in the backyard,
totally delivered and set free.
   Now here's something I want to get across to you.
We didn't do “warfare” with the devil to get that woman
healed. We just prayed in faith to God, and expected
Him to give us direction.
    This woman was healed by a manifestation of a gift
of the Spirit in operation. Yet even though you may
have an experience of the Holy Spirit that's based on
the Word of God, you can't go out and build a doctrine
on an experience—even if it is in line with the Word.
   And you can't go out and teach other people to try to
have the same experience or even the same
manifestation. You have to let God manifest Himself as
He wills, not as you will. This is where people miss it.
They try to put on a manifestation the Holy Spirit, or
they minister and try to work up something in the flesh.
Both are dangerous, and will lead people into error.
Just teach people the Word, and let God do the rest.
God will make His Word good in people's lives if they'll
dare to stand by it. Of course, if people don't stand by
God's Word, He doesn't have anything to make good in
their lives.

                          418
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


   But an experience like this one may never happen
again in ministering to someone. Experiences may come
and go, but the Word always works. If we could do
everything by a pat formula, we wouldn't need the Holy
Spirit. Build your life and ministry on the Word, not on
experiences and manifestations.
   I would have gotten people in a mess and my own
ministry in a mess if I had gone out and taught that
experience as doctrine. I saw this when I was young and
coming up in the ministry. So many ministers who
came up in my day failed in the ministry because they
didn't have a foundation in the Word; they built their
ministries on spiritual gifts. They were marvelous
people and had marvelous gifts of the Holy Spirit
operating in their lives. But they didn't have a
foundation of the Word in them, so one by one they
eventually got into error and deception and fell by the
wayside.
     I told some of them, "When you've come and gone,
I'll still be out there preaching and teaching because I'm
building my ministry on the Word of God, not on
spiritual gifts."
    You can't built your life or ministry on the gifts of
the Spirit and succeed. No, build both your life and
ministry on the Word of God. Let manifestations and
operations come as the Spirit of God wills. But just be
faithful to put the Word first, and base everything you
do on the Word, not on experiences.

            Healed by the Anointing
    I'll share about another cancer healing where I
didn't deal with an evil spirit at all. A young man came
to one of my meetings, and he also had cancer of the


                           419
                 The Triumphant Church


lungs.
    The doctors had given him six months to live. I
prayed for him twice, but I knew in my spirit that we
hadn't made our faith connection. Many times you can
lay hands on folks and it's like getting ahold of a live
wire; you know they are in faith and are believing God.
But you can lay hands on other people and it's like
laying hands on a doorknob. Somehow or another, the
power of God is short-circuited, because God is always
willing to heal.
   At one of the services, the spirit of prayer fell on us,
and everyone just hit the floor praying. This young man
with cancer knelt at the altar praying. I just walked
back and forth praying.
    Suddenly an unction of the Holy Spirit came upon
me, and I went over to this young man. It was as if an
unseen hand picked up my hand and placed it on his
head. But instead of praying, I found myself saying,
"You are now healed of cancer. Be filled with the Holy
Spirit. I have a place for you in ministry in My
vineyard." Instantly, that young man started speaking
in tongues.
    Afterwards, this young man went back to the
hospital and the doctors asked him, "Can you stay for a
few days? We don't understand it, but the cancer is all
gone." They kept him for five days, running every kind
of test on him. They never did find out why the cancer
had left him. But, praise God, we know why it left! God
healed him by the power of the Holy Spirit.
    You see, that time I didn't even pray for this young
man. I didn't cast anything out of him. In fact, I didn't
even deal with an evil spirit, yet he was totally
delivered and healed of cancer. The doctors said, "We
wouldn't believe he ever had cancer if we didn't have

                           420
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


the records to prove it."
    Folks make a mistake when they think they've got
to cast a devil out of every sick person just because they
dealt with an evil spirit one time in a particular
situation. That's how they get things in a mess.
   Years later, the pastor told me that this young man
had been pastoring a church for the last five years. God
had said to him, "I have a place for you in My vineyard."

        Healed by Faith in God's Word
    I ministered to another person with cancer, in which
the Lord healed in an entirely different way than He
did in these other cancer cases.
    I was holding a tent meeting for a Full Gospel
church. Months later I got a letter from the pastor,
telling me about a woman in his church who had
terminal cancer. She had attended one of my meetings,
but I wasn't even aware of it.
   This woman had been to one of the largest clinics in
our nation for treatment. The doctors there said she
had six months to live and had sent her home to die.
Nearly every healing evangelist in America at that time
had prayed for her healing. I'd laid hands on her twice,
but she didn't receive her healing.
   The pastor related to me, "She was so sick that she
had to be brought to your meetings in an ambulance
every day. There was a side room with a speaker in
there, so she just lay in that room and heard you teach
the Word."
   No one ever knew the woman was there. I never
knew it and never prayed for her. We ran this meeting
two weeks, so this woman went to ten meetings and
heard ten Bible lessons on faith. She put those lessons

                            421
                 The Triumphant Church


into practice, and she was totally healed.
    The pastor told me, "Brother Hagin, she's
completely well. She's been back to the cancer clinic,
and they've run every test on her, and they can't find a
trace of the cancer."
    There was no discerning of spirits that took place in
this woman's deliverance. She wasn't prayed for. She
just received deliverance through her own faith in the
Word of God.
    You won't be able to minister to people through the
gifts of the Spirit unless the Holy Spirit chooses to
manifest Himself in that way. But you can always
minister to people by teaching them what the Word
says.
    Just by sitting under the anointing of the Word and
by applying the Word to their lives, people can be set
free from any force of the enemy that's trying to bind
them and hold them in bondage. Once people hear the
Word of God, they need to act on it for themselves
because the Bible says it's the doer of the Word who is
blessed (James 1:22,25).
    However, the Spirit of God can also operate through
various other gifts of the Spirit such as prophecy or the
word of knowledge or discerning of spirits in order to
set people free. Let's rejoice in what God is doing. That's
what counts. And let's just let God be God and let Him
move any way He wants to move!
    I have related here various cancer cases. Each one of
these people were delivered by different methods by the
direction of the Holy Spirit. But each one of them got
delivered.
   Keep preaching the Word. If the manifestation of
the gifts of the Spirit come, fine! If they don't, keep

                           422
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


preaching the Word anyway. Keep putting the Word
out. It's the holy, incorruptible seed of God's Word that
produces the results, and it endures forever (1 Peter
1:23-25).
   And the Word always works because the Bible says
God watches over His Word to perform it, and His Word
doesn't return to Him without producing results (Jer.
1:12; Isa. 55:11).
    Eventually, if you are faithful to teach people what
the Word says, it will produce a bumper crop in their
lives. The Bible says, "He sent HIS WORD, and healed
them, and delivered them from their destructions" (Ps.
107:20). It doesn't say, "He sent spiritual gifts and
healed them and delivered them from their
destructions," although God may choose to move that
way in some instances.

            Dealing With the Insane
   Now I want to relate to you several cases of dealing
with insanity and show you that the same principle
applies. I've noticed particularly in dealing with insane
people, if they are still mentally coherent and you can
get through to them by preaching the Word, they can
receive it and be delivered. But if their minds aren't
functioning, you'll need to have a manifestation of the
Holy Ghost or you won't be able to help them. And you
can't produce that manifestation yourself.
    A Christian woman brought an insane woman to one
of my meetings. The insane woman was just waiting for
the authorities to come and institutionalize her. She sat
in the service and acted like a little child, constantly
shuffling and moving around and fidgeting. Right in the
middle of my Bible lesson, she'd stand up and say, "I


                           423
                 The Triumphant Church


have to go to the bathroom!" or "I want a drink of
water!" The woman with her would make her sit down
again.
    In that first service, the insane woman didn't pay
any attention to the Bible lesson. In the second meeting,
she began acting the same way—moving around and
fidgeting like a little child. But before the service was
over, I noticed that her eyes were fastened an me. She
was listening intently. The third day she brought her
Bible with her, and during the Bible lesson, she opened
her Bible and followed me.
   On the fourth day, she had a little notebook with
her and was taking notes. Before the ten days of the
meeting were over, she was saved, baptized in the Holy
Ghost, speaking in tongues, and her mind was
completely restored. She was totally delivered!
    I think sometimes we underestimate something
Paul said. He said, "... I am not ashamed of the
GOSPEL OF CHRIST: for IT is he POWER of God ..."
(Rom. 1:16). The gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ—this
living Word of God—is the power of God, and it is the
power of God unto salvation. Salvation from what?
Salvation for anything you need to be saved from!
    That woman never did have to be committed to the
mental institution. Five years later when I went back to
the same church, the woman and her husband were still
in that church and they were both on fire for God. But
the point I want to make is, I never did pray for her, lay
hands on her, or cast any devil out of her. What
delivered the woman? The gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Word of God is the power of God unto
salvation, deliverance, healing, and victory! The Word
of God did it all.
   I've also seen people come to my meetings whose

                           424
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


minds were completely incapacitated because of drugs.
But the Word of God got in them and it registered on
their spirits, and their minds were completely restored.
Today those people are just as sane as anyone else.
    There's power in the Word. And teaching the Word
is one way you're going to help people who are insane
and mentally incoherent. It doesn't matter whether
their mental state is due directly or indirectly to
demonic influence—the Word still works.
   I received a letter from a woman who said, "Brother
Hagin, I'm thirty-eight years old. I've spent more than
half of my life in a mental institution. Then someone
gave me your book, Right and Wrong Thinking. I began
to order more of your books and read them, and my
mind has been completely restored."
    That woman never did have a demon cast out of her.
The same doctors who said she would always need
institutional care pronounced her well and dismissed
her. She went on to devote her life to helping those in
mental institutions.
    If people will mix faith with the Word of God and
believe it, the Word of God will work for them no matter
what they need deliverance from. In the case of
insanity, teach the Word to those people whose minds
are coherent. Get the Word into them. If they will stand
in the place of victory in the Word, they will be
delivered. How do they stand in the place of victory? By
faith. By believing the Word. The Word is the power of
God. Teach them to put the power of God to work for
them by believing God's Word and acting on it.
    If people's minds are completely taken over by an
evil spirit, and they are totally incoherent or incapable
of sitting under the teaching of the Word of God, then
you will have to rely on the Holy Spirit to show you

                           425
                 The Triumphant Church


what to do. But in every case, there is deliverance in the
Lord Jesus Christ.

               Gift of Special Faith
   Let me give you an example of an insane person
whose mind was not coherent, but she was delivered by
a manifestation of the gifts of the Spirit.
    This woman wasn't born again. She'd lost her mind,
but it was more or less from a physical ailment. She
really wasn't that old, but she didn't know God.
Sometimes people seem to age faster without the life of
God working in them (Rom. 8:11). She had become
senile at a young age. One doctor said she had the mind
of a two-year-old child.
    My wife and I prayed for this woman for about two
hours. We weren't combating the devil or coming
against satanic powers or strongholds. We were talking
to God. We were just praying and worshipping God, and
waiting on Him to see if the Holy Spirit would manifest
Himself and show us what was wrong with her and how
to deal with her situation.
    The Holy Spirit didn't show us anything, so finally
the woman's daughter said to her, "Come on, Momma,
we've got to go now." The daughter got her mother up
and put her coat on her. My wife, Oretha, began to talk
to the daughter, so the insane woman sat back down on
the couch. I sat down beside her, and she muttered and
made strange sounds. She had a wild look in her eyes,
like she was having some sort of a spell.
   As I sat there watching her, such great compassion
rose up in me that with tears, I said, "Lord, why can't I
help this dear soul? Why can't I help her? If I can't get
through to her and help her to accept You, she'll go to


                           426
          Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


hell!"
    About that time, my wife and the woman's daughter
finished their conversation. The daughter turned
around and took her mother by the shoulders and sort
of shook her to bring her out of that spell she'd fallen
into.
    The daughter said, "Come on, Momma, we've got to
go." Suddenly, her mother blinked her eyes, turned her
head, and looked directly at me. The entire time she'd
been in our house, probably two to three hours, she had
not recognized anyone or said one sensible word. But
she suddenly turned to me and said very distinctly,
"Will I ever be any better?"
    When she said that, it was just like an electrical
charge struck me on the top of the head and went
through me. I knew exactly what it was; it was the
manifestation of the gift of special faith. The Holy
Ghost dropped the gift of special faith down in my spirit
to minister to this insane woman (1 Cor. 12:9). It wasn't
ordinary faith, or general faith, the faith that is
common to all of us (Rom. 10:17). It was a
manifestation of one of the gifts of the Spirit, the gift of
faith.
   That's where we miss it so many times. You see, in a
case like this, you could yell and scream and holler at
the devil all day long with ordinary faith, and nothing
would happen. Or if you yelled and screamed at the
devil in the natural, you could actually give place to the
devil, and he would accommodate you.
    In some cases, it takes the gift of special faith—an
operation of the Holy Spirit—to bring about
deliverance. Otherwise, you could say to an insane
person, "Be healed! Be healed! Mind, work normally!"
all you wanted, and the person would be just as insane

                            427
                 The Triumphant Church


as before.
   But the minute that gift of faith dropped down in
me, I answered the woman by the unction of the Holy
Spirit, “Yes! You will, in the Name of Jesus!” I couldn’t
have doubted that she would be delivered if I had tried.
I knew it was as good as done. That’s all I said, just as
calmly, as simply as can be. There was no other
manifestation whatsoever. The daughter bundled her
mother up and took her home.
    About two years later, the woman’s daughter came
to visit us. One of the first questions we asked her was,
“Whatever happened to your mother?”
    “Well,” she said, “I took Momma home, and the next
day and the day after that there was still no change.
But on the third day at three o’clock in the afternoon, as
quickly as you could snap your fingers, her mind was
totally restored.”
    The daughter explained, “I’d talked to her about
Jesus before she lost her mind, and she’d always say to
me, ‘I don’t believe in things like that. If you want to
believe it, fine. But just don’t ever talk to your father
and me about Jesus or the Bible.’”
    “So I just prayed for them,” the daughter continued,
“but I never said another word to them about Jesus. But
that day, the minute her mind was restored, she got
down on her knees and gave her heart to the Lord.
Daddy came into the room and saw Momma repenting
and accepting Jesus, and he got on his knees and said,
‘Pray for me too. I want to be saved too.’ And he gave
his heart to Jesus!”
   I didn’t cast a devil out of this woman. I didn’t lay
hands on her. All I did was to follow the leading of the
Holy Spirit and speak under the unction of the Spirit of


                           428
         Scriptural Ways to Minister Deliverance


God. Actually, it was the gift of special faith in
operation. I obeyed God. I didn’t try to operate
something by myself in the flesh.
    I’ve given these examples from my own ministry to
demonstrate that God heals and sets people free by
various methods, all of which are in line with His Word.
I’ve also used these examples from my own ministry to
show you that we can’t operate the gifts of the Holy
Spirit ourselves. We must be totally dependent on the
Holy Spirit for everything we do. If we try to minister
by set formulas, we’ll be in the flesh. Not only will we
fail, but we can even open a door to the devil.
    By ministering in the flesh, you can also eventually
go into deception because Satan operates in the realm of
the flesh—in the sense realm. Just stay with the Word
of God and be led by the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit
will always lead you in line with the Word of God.
    Base everything you do on the Word, not on
supernatural manifestations. If you operate according
to God's principles—according to Scripture—great
deliverances can be wrought because ultimately it's the
knowledge of the truth of God's Word that makes us
free.

      We Are the Church Triumphant!
   And whether you are ministering deliverance,
praying for the sick, or just taking a stand against the
devil in your own life—keep in mind that Satan is a
defeated foe. If you are a believer, you are seated with
Christ in heavenly places now. Jesus' victory over the
devil is your victory because you are in Him.
   Wherein does the authority of darkness lie? In
Satan. But we've been delivered from the authority of


                          429
                 The Triumphant Church


Satan! And we need to remember that he's been
defeated and dethroned!
   That's why I'm not going to fight the devil! I just
going to walk on over him and put him in his place
because I'm part of the triumphant Church!
    After all, just stop and think about it. Can anything
exert authority over your body without exerting
authority over your head? No, it can't. Whatever
belongs to your Head belongs to your Body.
    Well, since Jesus Christ, the Head of the Church
triumphed over demons, evil spirits, and Satan himself,
we did too, because we're His Body. His triumph is our
triumph! That's why we should call ourselves the
triumphant Church. That's who we are now—not when
we get to Heaven—but right now.
   Since we've been delivered from the authority of
Satan, he has no authority over the Body of Christ in
any way, shape, form, or fashion. But we have authority
over him in Christ! Jesus made an open show of Satan
and put his defeat on display by triumphing over him in
the Cross!
    Yes, we have to deal with evil forces, but we've got
authority over them. They're dethroned powers! We're a
triumphant Church, enjoying the victory that Jesus
already provided for us. We don't need to make war on
the devil. All we have to do is stand our ground against
him and put him on the run with the Word.
   Instead of these dethroned powers ruling over you—
you rule over them! In fact, if you not looking down
when you're dealing with the devil—you're not high
enough! Come on up and sit in heavenly places in
Christ where you belong—as the triumphant Church!



                          430
    With millions of Faith Library books in circulation,
the printed page continues to be a major outreach of
Kenneth Hagin Ministries. The voice of Kenneth Hagin
Ministries is further amplified around the world
through the following media: A 24-page free monthly
magazine, The Word of Faith; an international radio
broadcast, “Faith Seminar of the Air”; nationwide All
Faiths’ Crusades; Faith Library tapes; and RHEMA
Correspondence Bible School. These outreaches are
vital to the part Kenneth Hagin Ministries shares in
fulfilling the Great Commission—yet, there is more ...
    RHEMA Bible Training Center is another dynamic
outreach of Kenneth Hagin Ministries. Founded in
1974, RHEMA offers a high quality of ministerial
studies designed to train and equip men and women to
enter the Evangelistic, Pastoral, Teaching, Missions,
Helps, Youth, and Children’s ministries. Today
thousands of graduates of RHEMA have ventured into
every inhabited continent of the earth, carrying the
Good News of the Gospel of Jesus Christ—with signs
following.
    To receive a free, full-color brochure on RHEMA
Bible Training Center, a free monthly magazine, The
Word of Faith, or to receive our Faith Library Catalog
with a complete listing of Kenneth Hagin Ministries’
books and tapes, write:
   Kenneth Hagin Ministries
       P.O. Box 50126
    Tulsa, OK 74150-0126

         In Canada write:

P.O. Box 335, Etobicoke (Toronto), Ontario,
            Canada, M9A 4X3
